Chapter 2
Morality
LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
After reading this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Understand how to make sound moral reasoning.
• Discuss moral values and ideals in a person’s life.
• Understand the relationship between morality and religion.
• Understand what it means to have moral principles, the nature of con-
science, and the relationship between morality and self- interest.
Human beings do not live randomly. We follow a complex script, a life
script, a script based on cultural, religious, and philosophical concepts and
beliefs. Using the guidelines in that script, individuals then determine whether
their actions are right or wrong. The concepts and beliefs making up the guide-
lines are formulated, generalized, and codified by individual cultures or groups
over long periods of time. The main purpose of such guidelines is to regulate
the behavior of the members of that culture or group to create happiness for
all members of the culture or group. We define the concept of morality as the
conformity to such guidelines.
Morality
Morality is a set of rules of right conduct, a system used to modify and
regulate our behavior. It is a quality system by which we judge human acts
right or wrong, good or bad. This system creates moral persons who possess
virtues like love for others, compassion, and a desire for justice; thus, it builds
character traits in people. Morality is a lived set of shared rules, principles,
and duties, independent from religion which is practiced, applicable to all in
a group or society, and having no reference to the will or power of any one
11
12 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
individual whatever his or her status in that group or society. Every time we
interact in a society or group, we act the moral subscript. Because morality is
territorial and culturally based, as long as we live in a society, we are bound to
live the society’s moral script. The actions of individuals in a society only have
moral values if taken within the context of this very society and the culture
of the individual.
Although moral values are generally lived and shared values in a society,
the degree of living and sharing of these values varies greatly. We may agree
more on values like truth, justice, and loyalty than on others. A number of fac-
tors influence the context of morality, including time and place.
Moral Theories
If morality is a set of shared values among people in a specific society,
why do we have to worry about justifying those values to people who are not
members of that society? To justify an action or a principle requires showing
good reason for its existence and why there are no better alternatives. Justifying
morality is not a simple thing since morality, by its own definition, is not
simply justifiable especially to an outsider. Moral reasons require more justi-
fication than social reasons because moral reasons are much stronger than aes-
thetic ones; for example, murder is not immoral just because most people find
it revolting; it is much more than that. To justify more reasons, therefore, we
need something strong and plausible to anchor our reasoning on. That some-
thing cannot be religion, for example, because one’s religion is not everyone’s
religion. We need something that demonstrates that the balance of good in
an action is favorable to other people, not only to one’s interests and desires.
Moral theories do satisfy this purpose. According to Chris MacDonald, moral
theories “seek to introduce a degree of rationality and rigor into our moral
deliberations.”1 They give our deliberations plausibility and help us better
understand those values and the contradictions therein. Because many philoso-
phers and others use the words moral and ethical synonymously, we delay the
discussion of moral theories until we discuss ethics.
Moral Codes
For one to be morally good, one must practice the qualities of being good.
To live these qualities, one must practice and live within the guidelines of these
qualities. These guidelines are moral codes. The Internet Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy defines moral codes as rules or norms within a group for what is proper behavior for the members of that group.2 The norm itself is a rule, standard,
or measure for us to compare something else whose qualities we doubt. In a
way, moral codes are shared behavioral patterns of a group. These patterns
have been with us since the first human beings inhabited the Earth and have
evolved mainly for survival of the group or society. Societies and cultures sur-
vive and thrive because of the moral code they observe. Societies and cultures
throughout history like the once mighty Babylonians, Romans, and Byzantines
probably failed because their codes failed to cope with the changing times.
We have established that morality and cultures are different in different
societies. This does not, however, exclude the existence of the commonality
of humanity with timeless moral code. These codes are many and they come
in different forms including:
• The Golden Rule: “Do unto others as you would have them do unto
you.”
• The Bronze Rule: “Repay kindness with kindness.” This rule is widely
observed because of its many varying interpretations.
There is a commonality of good in these rules which equate to Carl
Sagan’s culture- free and timeless universal set of moral codes3:
• Be friendly at first meeting.
• Do not envy.
• Be generous; forgive your enemy if he or she forgives you.
• Be neither a tyrant nor a patsy.
• Retaliate proportionately to an intentional injury (within the con-
straints of the rule of the law).
• Make your behavior fairly (although not perfectly) clear and consis-
tent.
The purpose of moral codes in a society is to exert control over the actions
of the society’s members that result from emotions. Observance of moral codes
in most societies is almost involuntary mostly because members of such soci-
eties grow up with these codes so they tend to follow them religiously without
question. In some societies, observance is enforced through superstition, and
in others through folklore and custom.
The Need for a Moral Code
When you ask people what kind of life they like most, the most popular
answer is always going to be a life full of freedoms. They want to be free. Dem-
ocratic societies always claim to be free. The citizens have freedom. When you
14 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
ask anyone what they mean by freedom, they will say that freedom is doing
what they want to do, when they want to do it, and in the way that they want
to do it. What they are actually talking about is a life without restraints.
But can we live in a society where an individual can do anything that he
or she wants? Popular culture dictates this kind of freedom. One would there-
fore say that in a world or society like this, where everyone enjoys full freedoms,
there would be anarchy. Well, not so. God created humans, probably the only
creatures on earth who can reason. God endowed us with the capacity to rea-
son, to create guidelines for life so that everyone can enjoy freedom with rea-
son. Freedom with reason is the bedrock of morality. True, morality cannot
exist without freedom. Because humans have the capacity to reason, they can
attain the freedom they want by keeping a moral code. The moral code, there-
fore, is essential for humanity to attain and keep the freedoms humans need.
By neglecting the moral code in search of more freedoms, human beings can
lose the essential freedoms they need to live. Lee Bohannon calls it a moral
paradox: by wrongly using your freedom, you lose your freedom.4 Humanity
must realize the need for freedom within reasonable restraints—with the moral
code, because without the code, absolute freedoms result in no freedom at all.
Moral Standards
A moral standard is a moral norm, a standard to which we compare
human actions to determine their goodness or badness. This standard guides
and enforces policy. Morality is a system that, in addition to setting standards
of virtuous conduct for people, also consists of mechanisms to self- regulate
through enforcement of the moral code and to self- judge through guilt, which
is an internal discomfort resulting from disappointment self- mediated by con-
science.
Guilt and Conscience
Moral guilt is a result of self- judging and punishing oneself for not living
up to the moral standards set for oneself or for the group. If individuals judge
that they have not done “good” according to moral standards, they activate
the guilt response, which usually makes them feel bad, hide their actions from
both self and others, and find a fitting punishment for themselves, sometimes
a very severe punishment. This internal judgment system is brought about
because human beings have no sure way of telling whether an action is good
or bad based independently on their own standards. Individual standards are 2—Morality 15
usually judged based on group standards. So individuals judge themselves
based on group standards, and self- judgment sets in whenever one’s actions
fall short of the group’s standards.
The problem with guilt is that it can be cumulative. If individuals commit
acts repeatedly that they judge to be below moral standards, they tend to
become more and more withdrawn. This isolation often leads individuals to
become more comfortable with the guilt. As they become comfortable living
with the guilt, their previous actions, which were previously judged below
standards, begin to look not so bad after all. Individuals become more and
more complacent about the guilt and begin to look at the whole moral system
as amoral.
Guilt can be eased by encouraging people to focus on the intentions
behind the actions. Sometimes the intentions may be good but the resulting
action is bad. In such a case the individual should not feel so guilty about the
action. Besides looking for intent, one should also have the will and ability to
forgive oneself. Self- forgiveness limits the cumulative nature of guilt and hence
helps an individual to keep within the group.
Our moral code, and many times the law, lay out the general principles
that we ought not do because it is wrong to do it. The law also tells us not to
do this or that because it is illegal to do so. However, both systems do not spe-
cifically tell us whether a particular human action is an immoral or illegal act.
The link must be made by the individual—a self- realization. It is this inner
judgment that tells us if the act just committed is right or wrong, lawful or
unlawful. This inner judgment is what we call conscience. Additionally, con-
science is the capacity and ability to judge our actions ourselves based on what
we set as our moral standards. The word conscience comes from the Latin word
conscientia which means knowing with. It is an “inner voice” telling us what to
do or not to do. This kind of self- judgment is based on the responsibility and
control we have over our actions. Conscience is motivated by good feelings
within us such as pride, compassion, empathy, love, and personal identification.
Conscience evolves as individuals grow. The childhood conscience is far dif-
ferent from the adult conscience because the perception of evil evolves with
age. The benefits of conscience are that the actions taken with good conscience,
even if the results are bad, do not make one guilty of the actions.
Fr. Austin Fagothey5 writes that conscience applies to three things:
(i) the intellect as a faculty of forming judgments about right and wrong
individual acts,
(ii) the process of reasoning that the intellect goes through to reach such
judgment, and
(iii) the judgment itself which is the conclusion of this reasoning process.
16 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
We have seen in this section that morality does not belong to any indi-
vidual, nor does it belong to any society or group of people. Thus, it cannot
be localized. However, those parts of the moral code that can be localized
become law.
The Purpose of Morality—The Good Life
According to Michael Miller, the ancients identified the purpose of
morality with the chief good. Because morality is territorial, whatever chief
good they proposed—happiness for Aristotle, no pain for Epicurus, apathy
for the Stoics, heavenly afterlife for Christians—they took that chief good to
be the moral purpos
chapter 3 Chapter 3
Ethics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
After reading this chapter, the reader should be able to:
• Analyze an argument to identify premises and conclusion using ethical the-
ories.
• Understand the use of ethical theories in ethical arguments.
• Detect basic logical fallacies in an argument.
• Articulate the ethical tradeoffs in a technical decision.
• Understand the role of professional codes of ethics.
“The unexamined life is not worth living.” This is a statement made by
Socrates before the Athenian court. The jury gave him a death sentence for
his menacing practice of going around Athens asking its citizens the ultimate
questions of human existence.1 Socrates agreed to drink hemlock and kill him-
self for his belief in a science that represents a rational inquiry into the meaning
of life. Socrates’s pursuit was a result of the Greeks’ curiosity and their desire
to learn about themselves, human life and society. This led to the examination
of all human life, to which Socrates devoted his life. Philosophers call this
ethics. Ethics is, therefore, the study of right and wrong in human conduct.
Ethics can also be defined as a theoretical examination of morality or “theory
of morals.” Other philosophers have defined ethics in a variety of ways.
Robert C. Solomon, in Morality and the Good Life,
2 defines ethics as a set
of “theories of value, virtue, or of right (valuable) action.” O.J. Johnson, on the
other hand, defines ethics as a set of theories “that provide general rules or
principles to be used in making moral decisions and, unlike ordinary intuitions,
provides a justification for those rules.”3 The word ethics comes from the ancient
Greek word eché,
4 which means character. Every human society practices ethics
in some way because every society attaches a value on a continuum of good to
bad, right to wrong, to an individual’s actions according to where that indi-
vidual’s actions fall within the domain of that society’s rules and canons.
17
18 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
The role of ethics is to help societies distinguish between right and wrong
and to give each society a basis for justifying the judgment of human actions.
Ethics is, therefore, a field of inquiry whose subject is human actions, collec-
tively called human conduct, that are taken consciously, willfully, and for which
one can be held responsible. According to Fr. Austin Fagothey,5 such acts must
have knowledge, which signifies the presence of a motive, be voluntary, and
have freedom to signify the presence of free choice to act or not to act.
The purpose of ethics is to interpret human conduct, acknowledging and
distinguishing between right and wrong. The interpretation is based on a sys-
tem which uses a mixture of induction and deduction. In most cases, these
arguments are based on historical schools of thought called ethical theories.
There are many different kinds of ethical theories, and within each theory
there may be different versions of that theory. Let us discuss these next.
Ethical Theories
Since the dawn of humanity, human actions have been judged good or
bad, right or wrong based on theories or systems of justice developed, tested,
revised, and debated by philosophers and elders in each society. Such theories
are commonly known as ethical theories. An ethical theory determines if an
action or set of actions is morally right or wrong. Codes of ethics have been
drawn up based on these ethical theories. The processes of reasoning, expla-
nation, and justification used in ethics are based on these theories. Ethical the-
ories fall into two categories: those based on one choosing his or her action
based on the expected maximum value or values as a consequence of the action
and those based on one choosing his or her action based on one’s obligation
or requirements of duty. The Greeks called the first category of theories telos,
meaning purpose or aim. We now call these teleological or consequentialist the-
ories. The Greeks called the second category of theories deon, meaning binding
or necessary. Today, we call them deontological theories.6
Consequentialist Theories
We think of the right action as that which produces good consequences.
If an act produces good consequences, then it is the right thing to do. Those
who subscribe to this position are called consequentialists. Consequentialist
theories judge human actions as good or bad, right or wrong, based on the
best attainable results of such actions—a desirable result denotes a good action,
and vice versa. According to Richard T. Hull, consequentialist theories “have
three parts: a theory of value, a principle of utility, and a decision procedure.”7 Within these are further theories. For example, in the theory of value there
are several other theories held by consequentialists including8:
• Hedonism, which equates good with pleasure, bad or evil with pain.
• Eudamonism, which equates good with happiness, bad or evil with
unhappiness.
• Agathism, which views good as an indefinable, intrinsic feature of var-
ious situations and states. Evil is seen as either an indefinable, intrinsic
feature of other situations and states, or simply as the absence of good.
• Agapeism, which equates good with live, bad with hate.
• Values pluralism, which holds that there are many kinds of good,
including pleasure and happiness, but also knowledge, friendship, love,
and so forth. These may or may not be viewed as differing in impor-
tance or priority.
There are three commonly discussed types of consequentialist theory9:
(i) (ii) (iii) Egoism puts an individual’s interests and happiness above everything
else. With egoism, any action is good as long as it maximizes an indi-
vidual’s overall happiness. There are two kinds of egoism: ethical ego-
ism, which states how people ought to behave as they pursue their own
interests, and psychological egoism, which describes how people actu-
ally behave.
Utilitarianism, unlike egoism, puts a group’s interest and happiness
above those of an individual, for the good of many. Thus, an action is
good if it benefits the maximum number of people. Among the forms
of utilitarianism are the following:
• Act utilitarianism tells one to consider seriously the consequences
of all actions before choosing that with the best overall advantage,
happiness in this case, for the maximum number of people.10
• Rule utilitarianism tells one to obey those rules that bring the max-
imum happiness to the greatest number of people. Rule utilitarian-
ism maintains that a behavioral code or rule is good if the
consequences of adopting that rule are favorable to the greatest
number of people.11
Altruism states that an action is right if the consequences of that action
are favorable to all except the actor.
Deontological Theories
The theory of deontological reason does not concern itself with the con-
sequences of the action but rather with the will of the action. An action is
20 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
good or bad depending on the will inherent in it. According to deontological
theory, an act is considered good if the individual committing it had a good
reason to do so. This theory has a duty attached to it. For example, we know
that killing is bad, but if an armed intruder enters your house and you kill
him, your action is good, according to deontologists. You did it because you
had a duty to protect your family and property. Deontologists fall into two
categories: act deontologists and rule deontologists.
• Act deontologists consider every judgment of moral obligation to be
based on its own merit. We decide separately in each particular situ-
ation what is the right thing to do.
• Rule deontologists consider that one’s duty in any situation is to act
within rules.
All other contemporary ethical theories, as Richard T. Hull contends, are
hybrids of utilitarianist and deontologist theories.
The process of ethical reasoning takes several steps, which we refer to as
layers of reasoning, before one can justify to someone else the goodness or bad-
ness, rightness or wrongness of one’s action. For example, if someone wants
to convince you to own a concealed gun, he or she needs to explain to you
why it is good to have a concealed gun. In such an exercise, the person may
start by explaining to you that we are living in difficult times and that no one
is safe. You may then ask why no one is safe, to which the person might reply
that there are many bad people out there in possession of high- powered guns
waiting to fire them for various and very often unbelievable reasons. So owning
a gun will level the playing field. Then you may ask why owning a gun levels
the playing field, to which the answer would be that if the bad guys suspect
that you own a gun just like theirs, they will think twice before attacking you.
You may further ask why this is so; the answer may be that if they attack you,
they themselves can get killed in the action. Therefore, because of this fear,
you are not likely to be attacked. Hence, owning a gun may save your life and
enable you to continue pursuing the ultimate concept of the good life: hap-
piness.
On the other hand, to convince somebody not to own a concealed gun
also needs a plausible explanation and several layers of reasoning to demon-
strate why owning a gun is bad. Why is it a bad thing, you would ask, and the
answer would be because bad guys will always get guns. And if they do, the
possibility of everyone having a concealed gun may make those bad guys
trigger- happy to get you fast before you get them. It also evokes an imageof
the Wild West filled with gun- toting people daring everyone in order to get
a kick out of what may be a boring life. You would then ask why is this situation dangerous if no one fires? The reply might be because it creates a situation in
which innocent people may get hurt, denying them happiness and the good
life. The explanation and reasoning process can go on and on for several more
layers before one is convinced that owning a gun is good or bad. The act of
owning a gun is a human act that can be judged as either good or bad, right
or wrong depending on the moral and ethical principles used.
The spectrum of human actions on which ethical judgments can be based
is wide- ranging, from simple, traditional and easy to understand actions like
killing and stealing, to complex and abstract ones like hacking, cellular tele-
phone scanning, and subliminal human brain alterations. On one side of this
spectrum, the inputs have straight output value judgments of right and wrong
or good and evil. The other end of the spectrum, however, has inputs that can-
not be easily mapped into the same output value judgments of right and wrong
or good and evil. It is on this side of the input spectrum that most new human
actions, created as a result of computer technology, are found. It is at this end,
therefore, that we need an updated definition of ethics—a functional defini-
tion.
Codes of Ethics
The main domains in which ethics is defined are governed by a particular
and definitive regiment of guidelines and rules of thumb called codes of ethics.
These rules, guidelines, canons, advisories, or whatever you want to call them,
are usually followed by members of the respective domains. For example, your
family has an ethical set of rules that every member of the family must observe.
Your school has a set of conduct rules that all students, staff and faculty must
observe. And, your college has a set of rules that govern the use of college com-
puters. So depending on the domain, ethical codes can take any of the following
forms:
• principles, which may act as guidelines, references, or bases for some
document;
• public policies, which may include aspects of acceptable behavior,
norms, and practices of a society or group;
• codes of conduct, which may include ethical principles; and
• legal instruments, which enforce good conduct through courts.
Although the use of ethical codes is still limited to professions and high
visibility institutions and businesses, there is a growing movement toward
widespread use. The wording, content, and target of codes can differ greatly.
22 Computer Network Security and Cyber Ethics
Some codes are written purposely for the public, others target employees, and
yet others are for professionals only. The reader is referred to the codes of the
Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) and the Institute of Electric
and Electronics Engineers’ Computer Society (IEEE Computer), both pro-
fessional organizations. Codes for the ACM can be found at and those for
IEEE Computer at www.ieee.org.
Objectives of Codes of Ethics
Different domains and groups of people formulate different codes of
ethics, but they all have the following objectives:
• Disciplinary: By instilling discipline, the group or profession ensures
professionalism and integrity of its members.
• Advisory: Codes are usually a good source of tips for members, offering
advice and guidance in areas where moral issues are fuzzy.
• Educational: Ethical codes are good educational tools for members of
the domain, especially new members who have to learn the dos and
don’ts of the profession. The codes are also a good resource for existing
members needing to refresh and polish their possibly waning morals.
• Inspirational: Besides being disciplinary, advisory, and educational,
codes should also carry subliminal messages to those using them to
inspire them to be good.
• Publicity: One way for professions to create a good clientele is to show
that they have a strong code of ethics and, therefore, their members
are committed to basic values and are responsible.
The Relevancy of Ethics to Modern Life
When Socrates made the statement, “the unexamined life is not worth
living” before the Athens court in 399 BC, human life was the same as it is
today in almost every aspect except quality. Not much has changed in the
essence of life since Socrates’s time and now. We still struggle for the meaning
of life, we work to improve the quality of life and we do not rest unless we
have love, justice and happiness for all. Socrates spent time questioning the
people of Athens so that they, together with him, could examine their indi-
vidual lives to find “What I Individually Ought to Do” and “To Improve the
Lot of Humankind.” Many philosophers and those not so schooled believe
that this is the purpose of ethics.
The difficulty in finding “What I Individually Ought to Do” has always been, and continues to be for a modern life, a myriad of decisions that must
be made quickly, with overwhelming and quickly changing information, and
must be done reasonably well. This is not a simple statement that can be
quickly overlooked. We face these decision- making dilemmas every minute of
every day. Under these circumstances, when we are faced with the need to
make such decisions, do we really have enough information to make a sound
decision? When the information at hand is not complete and when the nec-
essary knowledge and understanding of reality is lacking, the ability to identify
the consequences of a decision may often lead to a bad decision. For a number
of people, when the ingredients of a good decision- making process are missing,
they rely on habits. Decisions based on habits are not always sound ethical
decisions, and they are not always good.
The purpose of ethics has been and continues to be, especially for us in
a modern and technologically driven society, the establishment of basic guide-
lines and rules of thumb for determining which behaviors are most likely to
promote the achievement of the “The Best,” over the long- term.12 These guide-
lines and rules of thumb are the codes of ethics. 