E T H I C S A N D I T F O R I T U S E R S
W O R K E R S
Q U O T E
This above all: to thine own self be true.
—William Shakespeare, playwright
V I G N E T T E
New York City Payroll Project Riddled with Fraud
The CityTime project was meant to replace a largely manual, paper-based payroll system for the city
of New York (NYC). The goal was to provide a tool that would help city administrators manage a
workforce of over 100,000 employees spread across 63 departments. It was also intended to simplify
the employee time-reporting process, which was complicated by numerous union timekeeping rules,
and to identify employees who tried to fraudulently inflate their paychecks. The project was initiated
in 1998 when the city awarded the contract to a subsidiary of MCI, a telecommunications company
that later ran into financial scandals and, ultimately, filed for bankruptcy.1
In 2001, the CityTime contract was reassigned to Science International Applications Incorporated
(SAIC), a defense company. In an unusual move, the handoff to SAIC occurred without the contract
going through the normal competitive bidding process required for contracts of this size. Around the
same time, Spherion Atlantic Enterprises was hired as a subcontractor to provide quality assurance on the CityTime project, with an initial contract of $3.4 million. The city’s contract with Spherion was
eventually revised 11 times, with a resulting cost of $48 million.2
Richard Valcich, the NYC payroll office executive director during the initial years of the project,
accused SAIC of dragging its feet on the project and was skeptical of the company’s ability to deliver
a quality product. However, Valcich retired in 2004 and was replaced by Joel Bondy, a staunch
advocate of the project.3 In this role, Bondy was responsible for overseeing and re-awarding Spher-
ion’s contract. It was later discovered that Bondy worked for Spherion for two years prior to joining
the city.
In another questionable move, the CityTime contract was switched from a fixed-price contract to
a “time and materials” contract, and the project costs spiraled out of control—from $224 million in
2006 to $628 million by 2009. This switch in the terms of the contract plus lack of project oversight
made it even easier for those involved with the project to commit fraud.4
At a city hearing in December 2010, Bondy revealed that Spherion employees were billing the
city at a rate of $236.25 per hour and that a number of former city employees had become Spherion
employees.5 Mr. Bondy resigned shortly after this meeting.6
That same month, federal prosecutors charged several consultants for the CityTime project with
a multimillion dollar fraud scheme, which allegedly started in 2005. The consultants were accused of
manipulating the city into paying for contracts to businesses that the consultants controlled, and then
redirecting part of the money to enrich themselves personally.7
In May 2011, federal investigators arrested Gerald Denault, the senior project manager at SAIC,
for allegedly receiving over $5 million in kickbacks and for committing wire fraud and money launder-
ing. Denault had convinced his employer to hire TechnoDyne LLC as the main subcontractor for the
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
project. TechnoDyne eventually received $450 million out of the $600 million paid to SAIC and
siphoned off millions to a bogus India-based consulting firm owned by Denault.8 The two owners of
TechnoDyne are now fugitives and their whereabouts are unknown. Six other defendants are sched-
uled to go to trial in 2013.9
43
In March 2012, SAIC agreed to pay $500 million to avoid prosecution for its role in the CityTime
scandal; most of that money was to go back to the city of New York. By this time, it was estimated
that NYC had paid out $652 million—with an outstanding bill of $41 million—owed on the project,
which was originally estimated to cost $63 million and to be completed in 2003.10
Questions to Consider
1. What were some early warning signs that signaled things were not going well with the City-
Time project?
2. What steps should city managers and SAIC have taken at an early stage of the project to
identify and prevent fraud?
L E A R N I N G O B J E C T I V E S
As you read this chapter, consider the following questions:
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. What key characteristics distinguish a professional from other kinds of
workers, and is an IT worker considered a professional?
What factors are transforming the professional services industry?
What relationships must an IT worker manage, and what key ethical
issues can arise in each?
How do codes of ethics, professional organizations, certification, and
licensing affect the ethical behavior of IT professionals?
What is meant by compliance, and how does it help promote the right
behaviors and discourage undesirable ones?
I T P R O F E S S I O N A L S
A profession is a calling that requires specialized knowledge and often long and intensive
academic preparation. Over the years, the United States government adopted labor laws
and regulations that required a more precise definition of what is meant by a professional employee. The United States Code of federal regulations defines a“professional employee”
as one who is engaged in the performance of work:
“(i) requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning
customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction
and study in an institution of higher learning or a hospital (as distinguished from
knowledge acquired by a general academic education, or from an apprenticeship,
or from training in the performance of routine mental, manual, mechanical, or
physical activities);
(ii) requiring the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment in its performance;
(iii) which is predominantly intellectual and varied in character (as distinguished
from routine mental, manual, mechanical, or physical work); and
(iv) which is of such character that the output produced or the result accomplished
by such work cannot be standardized in relation to a given period of time.”11
In other words, professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and accountants require
advanced training and experience; they must exercise discretion and judgment in the
course of their work; and their work cannot be standardized. Many people would also
expect professionals to contribute to society, to participate in a lifelong training program
(both formal and informal), to keep abreast of developments in their field, and to assist
other professionals in their development. In addition, many professional roles carry spe-
cial rights and responsibilities. Doctors, for example, prescribe drugs, perform surgery,
and request confidential patient information while maintaining doctor–patient
confidentiality.
Are IT Workers Professionals?
Many business workers have duties, backgrounds, and training that qualify them to be
classified as professionals, including marketing analysts, financial consultants, and IT
specialists such as mobile application developers, software engineers, systems analysts,
and network administrators. One could argue, however, that not every IT role requires
“knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by
a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction and study,” to quote again from
the United States Code. From a legal perspective, IT workers are not recognized as
professionals because they are not licensed by the state or federal government. This
distinction is important, for example, in malpractice lawsuits, as many courts have ruled
that IT workers are not liable for malpractice because they do not meet the legal definition
of a professional.
Professional Relationships That Must Be Managed
IT workers typically become involved in many different relationships, including
those with employers, clients, suppliers, other professionals, IT users, and society
at large—as illustrated in Figure 2-1. In each relationship, an ethical IT worker
acts honestly and appropriately. These various relationships are discussed in the
following sections.
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
45
Employers
Society
Clients
IT
worker
IT users
Suppliers
Other
professionals
FIGURE 2-1 Professional relationships IT workers must manage
Credit: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Relationships Between IT Workers and Employers
IT workers and employers have a critical, multifaceted relationship that requires ongoing
effort by both parties to keep it strong. An IT worker and an employer typically agree on
fundamental aspects of this relationship before the worker accepts an employment offer.
These issues may include job title, general performance expectations, specific work
responsibilities, drug-testing requirements, dress code, location of employment, salary,
work hours, and company benefits. Many other aspects of this relationship may be
addressed in a company’s policy and procedures manual or in the company’s code of
conduct, if one exists. These issues may include protection of company secrets; vacation
policy; time off for a funeral or an illness in the family; tuition reimbursement; and use
of company resources, including computers and networks.
Other aspects of this relationship develop over time as the need arises (for example,
whether the employee can leave early one day if the time is made up another day). Some
aspects are addressed by law—for example, an employee cannot be required to do
anything illegal, such as falsify the results of a quality assurance test. Some aspects are
specific to the role of the IT worker and are established based on the nature of the work
or project—for example, the programming language to be used, the type and amount of
documentation to be produced, and the extent of testing to be conducted. As the stewards of an organization’s IT resources, IT workers must set an example
and enforce policies regarding the ethical use of IT. IT workers often have the skills and
knowledge to abuse systems and data or to enable others to do so. Software piracy is an
area in which IT workers may be tempted to violate laws and policies. Although end users
often get the blame when it comes to using illegal copies of commercial software, software
piracy in a corporate setting is sometimes directly traceable to IT staff members—either
they allow it to happen or they actively engage in it, often to reduce IT-related spending.
The Business Software Alliance (BSA) is a trade group that represents the world’s
largest software and hardware manufacturers. Its mission is to stop the unauthorized
copying of software produced by its members. BSA is funded both through dues based
on member companies’ software revenues and through settlements from companies that
commit piracy. BSA membership includes two dozen or so members such as Adobe,
Apple, Intel, McAfee, Microsoft, Symantec, and The Math Works.
More than 100 BSA lawyers and investigators prosecute thousands of cases of software
piracy each year. BSA investigations are usually triggered by calls to the BSA hotline
(1-888-NO-PIRACY), reports sent to the BSA Web site (www.nopiracy.org), and referrals
from member companies. Many of these cases are reported by disgruntled employees or
former employees. For 2011, the commercial value of software piracy in the United States
was estimated to be nearly $10 billion with 31 percent of computer users participating in
this illegal activity.12 When BSA finds cases of software piracy, it assesses heavy monetary
penalties.
Failure to cooperate with the BSA can be extremely expensive. The cost of criminal or
civil penalties to a corporation and the people involved can easily be many times more
expensive than the cost of“getting legal” by acquiring the correct number of software
licenses. Software manufacturers can file a civil suit against software pirates with penalties
of up to $150,000 per copyrighted work. Furthermore, the government can criminally
prosecute violators and fine them up to $250,000, incarcerate them for up to five years,
or both.
In 2012, the Alexander Automotive Group paid $325,000 to settle claims that it was
using unlicensed Microsoft software on its computers. As part of the settlement agreement
with BSA, the firm deleted all unlicensed copies of software from its computers, purchased
the licenses required to become compliant, and agreed to implement more effective soft-
ware management procedures. BSA was alerted to this situation by a report sent to its
Web site.13
Trade secrecy is another area that can present challenges for IT workers and their
employers. A trade secret is information, generally unknown to the public, that a company
has taken strong measures to keep confidential. It represents something of economic value
that has required effort or cost to develop and that has some degree of uniqueness or
novelty. Trade secrets can include the design of new software code, hardware designs,
business plans, the design of a user interface to a computer program, and manufacturing
processes. Examples include the Colonel’s secret recipe of 11 herbs and spices used to
make the original KFC chicken, the formula for Coke, and Intel’s manufacturing process
for the i7 quad core processing chip. Employers worry that employees may reveal these
secrets to competitors, especially if they leave the company. As a result, companies often
require employees to sign confidentiality agreements and promise not to reveal the
company’s trade secrets.
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
47
Zynga is a provider of online social games such as ChefVille, CityVille, FarmVille,
FrontierVille, and Zynga Poker that boast over 300 million active monthly users.14 After
just over a year with Zynga, the firm’s general manager of CityVille left to become a vice
president at Kixeye, a competitor. Zynga claimed that the employee stole files with data
critical to the business—including financial projections, marketing plans, and game
designs.15 Zynga filed a request for a temporary restraining order barring its former
employee from sharing or copying the information or from engaging in any actions using
the information to develop online games employing these trade secrets.
Another issue that can create friction between employers and IT workers is whistle-
blowing. Whistle-blowing is an effort by an employee to attract attention to a negligent,
illegal, unethical, abusive, or dangerous act by a company that threatens the public inter-
est. Whistle-blowers often have special information based on their expertise or position
within the offending organization. For example, an employee of a chip manufacturing
company may know that the chemical process used to make the chips is dangerous to
employees and the general public. A conscientious employee would call the problem to
management’s attention and try to correct it by working with appropriate resources within
the company. But what if the employee’s attempt to correct the problem through internal
channels was thwarted or ignored? The employee might then consider becoming a whistle-
blower and reporting the problem to people outside the company, including state or
federal agencies that have jurisdiction. Obviously, such actions could have negative
consequences on the employee’s job, perhaps resulting in retaliation and firing.
The H-1B visa is a work visa that allows foreigners to come to the United States and work
full-time in specialty occupations that require at least a four-year bachelor’s degree in a spe-
cific field. A U.S. consultant for India-based outsourcing firm Infosys filed a whistle-blower
lawsuit against the firm for abusing H-1B program rules. The lawsuit alleged that at a man-
agement meeting in Bangalore, Infosys officials discussed the need to“creatively” circumvent
the H-1B visa restrictions. The lawsuit further alleged that Infosys brought workers to the
United States on B-1 visas (which are intended for workers coming to the United States for
short-term work assignments only), but that these workers were assigned full-time jobs. It also
claimed that Infosys was not paying the B-1 workers the prevailing wage and was not
withholding federal and state income taxes.16 The whistle-blower filed a separate lawsuit in
which he claimed that Infosys retaliated against him for the filing of the visa-related lawsuit
by lowering his bonuses, harassing him, and giving him no meaningful work to do.17
Relationships Between IT Workers and Clients
IT workers provide services to clients; sometimes those“clients” are coworkers who are
part of the same organization as the IT worker. In other cases, the client is part of a dif-
ferent organization. In relationships between IT workers and clients, each party agrees to
provide something of value to the other. Generally speaking, the IT worker provides hard-
ware, software, or services at a certain cost and within a given time frame. For example,
an IT worker might agree to implement a new accounts payable software package that
meets a client’s requirements. The client provides compensation, access to key contacts,
and perhaps a work space. This relationship is usually documented in contractual terms—
who does what, when the work begins, how long it will take, how much the client pays,
and so on. Although there is often a vast disparity in technical expertise between I 48
Typically, the client makes decisions about a project on the basis of information,
alternatives, and recommendations provided by the IT worker. The client trusts the IT
worker to use his or her expertise and to act in the client’s best interests. The IT worker
must trust that the client will provide relevant information, listen to and understand what
the IT worker says, ask questions to understand the impact of key decisions, and use the
information to make wise choices among various alternatives. Thus, the responsibility for
decision making is shared between client and IT worker.
One potential ethical problem that can interfere with the relationship between IT
workers and their clients involves IT consultants or auditors who recommend their own
products and services or those of an affiliated vendor to remedy a problem they have
detected. Such a situation has the potential to undermine the objectivity of an IT worker
due to a conflict of interest—a conflict between the IT worker’s (or the IT firm’s) self-
interest and the interests of the client. For example, an IT consulting firm might be hired
to assess a firm’s IT strategic plan. After a few weeks of analysis, the consulting firm might
provide a poor rating for the existing strategy and insist that its proprietary products and
services are required to develop a new strategic plan. Such findings would raise questions
about the vendor’s objectivity and whether its recommendations can be trusted.
Problems can also arise during a project if IT workers find themselves unable to pro-
vide full and accurate reporting of the project’s status due to a lack of information, tools,
or experience needed to perform an accurate assessment. The project manager may want
to keep resources flowing into the project and hope that problems can be corrected before
anyone notices. The project manager may also be reluctant to share status information
because of contractual penalties for failure to meet the schedule or to develop certain sys-
tem functions. In such a situation, the client may not be informed about a problem until it
has become a crisis. After the truth comes out, finger-pointing and heated discussions
about cost overruns, missed schedules, and technical incompetence can lead to charges
of fraud, misrepresentation, and breach of contract.
Fraud is the crime of obtaining goods, services, or property through deception or
trickery. Fraudulent misrepresentation occurs when a person consciously decides to
induce another person to rely and act on a misrepresentation. To prove fraud in a court
of law, prosecutors must demonstrate the following elements:
• The wrongdoer made a false representation of material fact.
• The wrongdoer intended to deceive the innocent party.
• The innocent party justifiably relied on the misrepresentation.
• The innocent party was injured.
As an example of alleged fraud, consider the case of Paul Ceglia, who in 2010 sued
Facebook claiming to own a majority of the company. Ceglia claimed that he signed a
contract with Mark Zuckerberg in 2003 to design and develop the Web site that eventually
became Facebook. He alleged that he paid Zuckerberg $1,000 for the programming work
and also invested an additional $1,000 in Zuckerberg’s Facebook project in exchange for a
50 percent interest in Facebook.18 Facebook lawyers have asserted that the lawsuit is an
outright fraud and have depositions alleging that“Ceglia manufactured evidence, including
purported emails with Zuckerberg, to support his false claim to an interest in Facebook”
and that“Ceglia destroyed evidence that was inconsistent with his false claim.” Facebook’s
attorneys pointed out that Zuckerberg did not even conceive of Facebook until eight
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
months after Zuckerberg did the contract work (which, they say, was completely unrelated
to Facebook) for Ceglia. They further alleged that Ceglia’s emails to Zuckerberg were
manufactured to support his claims. Eventually, Ceglia was arrested on federal mail and
wire fraud charges.19
Misrepresentation is the misstatement or incomplete statement of a material fact. If
the misrepresentation causes the other party to enter into a contract, that party may have
the legal right to cancel the contract or seek reimbursement for damages.
Siri, the voice-activated software that comes with the Apple iPhone, has delighted
many iPhone users; however, not everyone has had a positive experience. Shortly after
one user in New York purchased an iPhone 4S, he realized that Siri was not performing as
expected. When he asked Siri for directions, it did not understand the question or after a
long delay gave incorrect directions. As a result, the user filed a lawsuit against Apple
claiming that advertising for the Siri amounted to“intentional misrepresentation” and that
Apple’s claims about the Siri software were“misleading and deceptive.” Attorneys for this
user are considering turning the case into a class action against Apple.20
Breach of contract occurs when one party fails to meet the terms of a contract. Fur-
ther, a material breach of contract occurs when a party fails to perform certain express or
implied obligations, which impairs or destroys the essence of the contract. Because there
is no clear line between a minor breach and a material breach, determination is made on a
case-by-case basis.“When there has been a material breach of contract, the nonbreaching
party can either: (1) rescind the contract, seek restitution of any compensation paid under
the contract to the breaching party, and be discharged from any further performance
under the contract; or (2) treat the contract as being in effect and sue the breaching party
to recover damages.”21
In an out-of-court settlement of a breach of contract lawsuit brought by the General
Services Administration (GSA), Oracle Corporation agreed to pay the federal agency
$200 million. Oracle entered into a contract with the GSA for the sale of software and
technical support to various departments of the federal government. The contract required
Oracle to provide the government with its pricing policies. The lawsuit arose when the
GSA claimed that Oracle“knowingly failed to meet its contractual obligations to provide
GSA with current, accurate, and complete information about its commercial sales prac-
tices, including discounts offered to other customers, and that Oracle knowingly made
false statements to GSA about its sales practices and discounts.” The GSA further claimed
that Oracle failed to disclose that other customers received greater discounts than the
GSA and that, based on its contract with Oracle, those discounts should have been passed
on to the GSA.22
When IT projects go wrong because of cost overruns, schedule slippage, lack of
system functionality, and so on, aggrieved parties might charge fraud, fraudulent
misrepresentation, and/or breach of contract. Trials can take years to settle, generate
substantial legal fees, and create bad publicity for both parties. As a result, the vast
majority of such disputes are settled out of court, and the proceedings and outcomes
are concealed from the public. In addition, IT vendors have become more careful about
protecting themselves from major legal losses by requiring that contracts place a limit
on potential damages.
Most IT projects are joint efforts in which vendors and customers work together to
develop a system. Assigning fault when such projects go wrong can be difficult; one side might be partially at fault, while the other side is mostly at fault. Clients and vendors often
disagree about who is to blame in such circumstances. Consider the following frequent
causes of problems in IT projects:
• The customer changes the scope of the project or the system requirements.
• Poor communication between customer and vendor leads to performance
that does not meet expectations.
• The vendor delivers a system that meets customer requirements, but a
competitor comes out with a system that offers more advanced and useful
features.
• The customer fails to reveal information about legacy systems or databases
that make the new system extremely difficult to implement.
Relationships Between IT Workers and Suppliers
IT workers deal with many different hardware, software, and service providers. Most IT
workers understand that building a good working relationship with suppliers encourages
the flow of useful communication as well as the sharing of ideas. Such information can
lead to innovative and cost-effective ways of using the supplier’s products and services that
the IT worker may never have considered.
IT workers can develop good relationships with suppliers by dealing fairly with them
and not making unreasonable demands. Threatening to replace a supplier who can’t
deliver needed equipment tomorrow, when the normal industry lead time is one week, is
aggressive behavior that does not help build a good working relationship.
Suppliers strive to maintain positive relationships with their customers in order to
make and increase sales. To achieve this goal, they may sometimes engage in unethical
actions—for example, offering an IT worker a gift that is actually intended as a bribe.
Clearly, IT workers should not accept a bribe from a vendor, and they must be careful
when considering what constitutes a bribe. For example, accepting invitations to expen-
sive dinners or payment of entry fees for a golf tournament may seem innocent to the
recipient, but it may be perceived as bribery by an auditor.
Bribery is the act of providing money, property, or favors to someone in business or
government in order to obtain a business advantage. An obvious example is a software
supplier sales representative who offers money to another company’s employee to get its
business. This type of bribe is often referred to as a kickback or a payoff. The person who
offers a bribe commits a crime when the offer is made, and the recipient is guilty of a
crime if he or she accepts the bribe. Various states have enacted bribery laws, which have
sometimes been used to invalidate contracts involving bribes but have seldom been used
to make criminal convictions.
A former midlevel supply chain manager at Apple pled guilty in 2011 to taking over
$1 million in payments from certain iPhone, iPad, and iPod suppliers in China, Singa-
pore, South Korea, and Taiwan. The kickbacks took place over several years and were in
exchange for the employer providing confidential information about Apple’s production
plans, enabling the suppliers to negotiate more favorable deals with Apple. He now
faces 20 years in prison on charges of money laundering, receiving kickbacks, and
wire fraud.23
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) makes it a crime to bribe a foreign official,
a foreign political party official, or a candidate for foreign political office. The act applies
to any U.S. citizen or company and to any company with shares listed on any U.S. stock
exchange. However, a bribe is not a crime if the payment was lawful under the laws of
the foreign country in which it was paid. Penalties for violating the FCPA are severe—
corporations face a fine of up to $2 million per violation, and individual violators may
be fined up to $100,000 and imprisoned for up to five years.
The FCPA also requires corporations whose securities are listed in the United States
to meet U.S. accounting standards by having an adequate system of internal controls,
including maintaining books and records that accurately and fairly reflect their transac-
tions. The goal of these standards is to prevent companies from using slush funds or
other means to disguise payments to foreign officials. A firm’s business practices and its
accounting information systems must be frequently audited by both internal and outside
auditors to ensure that they meet these standards.
The FCPA permits facilitating payments that are made for“routine government
actions,” such as obtaining permits or licenses; processing visas; providing police protec-
tion; providing phone services, power, or water supplies; or facilitating actions of a similar
nature. Thus, it is permissible under the FCPA to pay an official to perform some official
function faster (for example, to speed customs clearance) but not to make a different
substantive decision (for example, to award business to one’s firm).24
There is growing global recognition of the need to prevent corruption. The United
Nations Convention Against Corruption is a legally binding global treaty designed to fight
bribery and corruption. During its November 2010 meeting, Finance Ministers and Central
Bank Ministers of members of the Group of 20 (G20), which includes Argentina, China,
India, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom, the United States, and 13 other countries,
pledged to implement this treaty effectively. In particular, the countries pledged to put in
place mechanisms for the recovery of property from corrupt officials through international
cooperation in tracing, freezing, and confiscating assets. Members also pledged to adopt
and enforce laws against international bribery and put in place rules to protect whistle-
blowers.25
In some countries, gifts are an essential part of doing business. In fact, in some coun-
tries, it would be considered rude not to bring a present to an initial business meeting.
In the United States, a gift might take the form of free tickets to a sporting event from
a personnel agency that wants to get on your company’s list of preferred suppliers. But,
at what point does a gift become a bribe, and who decides?
The key distinguishing factor is that no gift should be hidden. A gift may be consid-
ered a bribe if it is not declared. As a result, most companies require that all gifts be
declared and that everything but token gifts be declined. Some companies have a policy
of pooling the gifts received by their employees, auctioning them off, and giving the
proceeds to charity.
When it comes to distinguishing between bribes and gifts, the perceptions of the donor
and the recipient can differ. The recipient may believe he received a gift that in no way
obligates him to the donor, particularly if the gift was not cash. The donor’s intentions,
however, might be very different. Table 2-1 shows some distinctions between bribes
and gifts. TABLE 2-1 Distinguishing between bribes and gifts
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Bribes Gifts
Are made in secret, as they are neither legally nor
morally acceptable
Are made openly and publicly, as a gesture of
friendship or goodwill
Are often made indirectly through a third party Are made directly from donor to recipient
Encourage an obligation for the recipient to act
favorably toward the donor
Come with no expectation of a future favor for
the donor
Relationships Between IT Workers and Other Professionals
Professionals often feel a degree of loyalty to the other members of their profession. As a
result, they are often quick to help each other obtain new positions but slow to criticize
each other in public. Professionals also have an interest in their profession as a whole,
because how it is perceived affects how individual members are viewed and treated. (For
example, politicians are not generally thought to be very trustworthy, but teachers are.)
Hence, professionals owe each other an adherence to the profession’s code of conduct.
Experienced professionals can also serve as mentors and help develop new members of
the profession.
A number of ethical problems can arise among members of the IT profession. One of
the most common is résumé inflation, which involves lying on a résumé by, for example,
claiming competence in an IT skill that is in high demand. Even though an IT worker
might benefit in the short term from exaggerating his or her qualifications, such an action
can hurt the profession and the individual in the long run. Many employers consider lying
on a résumé as grounds for immediate dismissal.
Yahoo! hired Scott Thompson, the president of eBay’s PayPal electronic payments
unit, as its new CEO in January 2012.26 Just four months later, Thompson left the com-
pany, due, at least in part, to revelations that his résumé falsely claimed that he had
earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science.27
Some studies have shown that around 30 percent of all U.S. job applicants exaggerate
their accomplishments, while roughly 10 percent“seriously misrepresent” their
backgrounds.28 Résumé inflation is an even bigger problem in Asia. According to a recent
survey conducted by the University of Hong Kong and a Hong Kong–based company
specializing in preemployment screening, over 62 percent of respondents confessed to
exaggerating their years of experience, previous positions held, and job responsibilities;
33 percent confessed to having exaggerated even more.29 Table 2-2 lists the areas of a
résumé that are most prone to exaggeration.
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Area of exaggeration How to uncover the truth
Dates of employment Thorough reference check
Job title Thorough reference check
Criminal record Criminal background check
Inflated salary Thorough reference check
Education Verification of education claims with universities and other
training organizations
Professional licenses Verification of license with accrediting agency
Working for fictitious company Thorough background check
TABLE 2-2 Most frequent areas of résumé falsehood or exaggeration
Source Line: Lisa Vaas,“Most Common Resume Lies,” The Ladders, July 17, 2009, www.theladders.com/
career-advice/most-common-resume-lies.
53
Another ethical issue that can arise in relationships between IT workers and other
professionals is the inappropriate sharing of corporate information. Because of their roles,
IT workers may have access to corporate databases of private and confidential information
about employees, customers, suppliers, new product plans, promotions, budgets, and so
on. It might be sold to other organizations or shared informally during work conversations
with others who have no need to know.
Relationships Between IT Workers and IT Users
The term IT user refers to a person who uses a hardware or software product; the term
distinguishes end users from the IT workers who develop, install, service, and support the
product. IT users need the product to deliver organizational benefits or to increase their
productivity.
IT workers have a duty to understand a user’s needs and capabilities and to deliver
products and services that best meet those needs—subject, of course, to budget and time
constraints. IT workers also have a key responsibility to establish an environment that
supports ethical behavior by users. Such an environment discourages software piracy,
minimizes the inappropriate use of corporate computing resources, and avoids the
inappropriate sharing of information.
Relationships Between IT Workers and Society
Regulatory laws establish safety standards for products and services to protect the public.
However, these laws are less than perfect, and they cannot safeguard against all negative
side effects of a product or process. Often, professionals can clearly see the effect their
work will have and can take action to eliminate potential public risks. Thus, society
expects members of a profession to provide significant benefits and to not cause harm
through their actions. One approach to meeting this e Clearly, the actions of an IT worker can affect society. For example, a systems analyst
may design a computer-based control system to monitor a chemical manufacturing pro-
cess. A failure or an error in the system may put workers or residents near the plant at
risk. As a result, IT workers have a relationship with members of society who may be
affected by their actions. There is currently no single, formal organization of IT workers
that takes responsibility for establishing and maintaining standards that protect the public.
However, as discussed in the following sections, there are a number of professional orga-
nizations that provide useful professional codes of ethics to guide actions that support the
ethical behavior of IT workers.
Professional Codes of Ethics
A professional code of ethics states the principles and core values that are essential to the
work of a particular occupational group. Practitioners in many professions subscribe to a
code of ethics that governs their behavior. For example, doctors adhere to varying versions
of the 2,000-year-old Hippocratic oath, which medical schools offer as an affirmation to
their graduating classes. Most codes of ethics created by professional organizations have
two main parts: The first outlines what the organization aspires to become, and the second
typically lists rules and principles by which members of the organization are expected to
abide. Many codes also include a commitment to continuing education for those who
practice the profession.
Laws do not provide a complete guide to ethical behavior. Just because an activity is
not defined as illegal does not mean it is ethical. Nor can a professional code of ethics be
expected to provide an answer to every ethical dilemma—no code can be a definitive
collection of behavioral standards. However, following a professional code of ethics can
produce many benefits for the individual, the profession, and society as a whole:
• Ethical decision making—Adherence to a professional code of ethics means
that practitioners use a common set of core values and beliefs as a guideline
for ethical decision making.
• High standards of practice and ethical behavior—Adherence to a code of
ethics reminds professionals of the responsibilities and duties that they may
be tempted to compromise to meet the pressures of day-to-day business.
The code also defines acceptable and unacceptable behaviors to guide
professionals in their interactions with others. Strong codes of ethics have
procedures for censuring professionals for serious violations, with penalties
that can include the loss of the right to practice. Such codes are the excep-
tion, however, and few exist in the IT arena.
• Trust and respect from the general public—Public trust is built on the
expectation that a professional will behave ethically. People must often
depend on the integrity and good judgment of a professional to tell the truth,
abstain from giving self-serving advice, and offer warnings about the potential
negative side effects of their actions. Thus, adherence to a code of ethics
enhances trust and respect for professionals and their profession.
• Evaluation benchmark—A code of ethics provides an evaluation benchmark
that a professional can use as a means of self-assessment. Peers of the pro-
fessional can also use the code for recognition or censure.
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Professional Organizations
No one IT professional organization has emerged as preeminent, so there is no universal
code of ethics for IT workers. However, the existence of such organizations is useful in a
field that is rapidly growing and changing. In order to stay on top of the many new devel-
opments in their field, IT workers need to network with others, seek out new ideas, and
continually build on their personal skills and expertise. Whether you are a freelance pro-
grammer or the CIO of a Fortune 500 company, membership in an organization of IT
workers enables you to associate with others of similar work experience, develop working
relationships, and exchange ideas. These organizations disseminate information through
email, periodicals, Web sites, meetings, and conferences. Furthermore, in recognition of
the need for professional standards of competency and conduct, many of these organiza-
tions have developed codes of ethics. Four of the most prominent IT-related professional
organizations are highlighted in the following sections.
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) is a computing society founded in 1947
with over 97,000 student and professional members in more than 100 countries. It is
international in scope—with an ACM Europe, ACM India, and ACM China organization.
ACM currently publishes over 50 journals and magazines and 30 newsletters—including
Communications of the ACM (ACM’s primary publication), ACM Tech News (coverage of
timely topics for IT professionals), XRDS (for both graduate and undergraduate students
considering computing careers), RISKS Forum (a moderated dialogue on risks to the pub-
lic from computers and related systems), and eLearn (an online magazine about online
education and training). The organization also offers a substantial digital library of biblio-
graphic information, citations, articles, and journals. The ACM sponsors 37 special-interest
groups (SIGs) representing major areas of computing. Each group provides publications,
workshops, and conferences for information exchange.30
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society (IEEE-CS)
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) covers the broad fields of
electrical, electronic, and information technologies and sciences. The IEEE-CS is one of
the oldest and largest IT professional associations, with about 85,000 members. Founded
in 1946, the IEEE-CS is the largest of the 38 societies of the IEEE. The IEEE-CS helps
meet the information and career development needs of computing researchers and practi-
tioners with technical journals, magazines, books, conferences, conference publications,
and online courses. It also offers a Certified Software Development Professional (CSDP)
program for experienced professionals and a Certified Software Development Associate
(CSDA) credential for recent college graduates. The society sponsors many conferences,
applications-related and research-oriented journals, local and student chapters, technical
committees, and standards working groups.31
In 1993, the ACM and IEEE-CS formed a Joint Steering Committee for the Establish-
ment of Software Engineering as a Profession. The initial recommendations of the
committee were to define ethical standards, to define the required body of knowledge and
recommended practices in software engineering, and to define appropriate curricula to
acquire knowledge. The“Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional Practice” documents the ethical and professional responsibilities and obligations of software
engineers. After a thorough review process, version 5.2 of the Software Engineering Code
of Ethics was adopted by both the ACM and IEEE-CS in 1999.32
Association of Information Technology Professionals (AITP)
The Association of Information Technology Professionals (AITP) started in Chicago in
1951, when a group of machine accountants got together and decided that the future was
bright for the IBM punched-card tabulating machines they were operating—a precursor of
the modern electronic computer. They were members of a local group called the Machine
Accountants Association (MAA), which first evolved into the Data Processing Management
Association in 1962 and finally the AITP in 1996.33
The AITP provides IT-related seminars and conferences, information on IT issues, and
forums for networking with other IT workers. Its mission is to provide superior leadership
and education in information technology, and one of its goals is to help members make
themselves more marketable within their industry. The AITP also has a code of ethics and
standards of conduct. The standards of conduct are considered to be rules that no true IT
professional should violate.
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS) Institute
The SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS) Institute provides information security
training and certification for a wide range of individuals, such as auditors, network admin-
istrators, and security managers. Each year, its programs train some 12,000 people, and a
total of more than 165,000 security professionals around the world have taken one or
more of its courses. SANS publishes a semiweekly news digest (NewsBites), a weekly
security vulnerability digest (@Risk), and flash security alerts.34
At no cost, SANS makes available a collection of some 1,200 research documents
about various topics of information security. SANS also operates Internet Storm Center—a
program that monitors malicious Internet activity and provides a free early warning ser-
vice to Internet users—and works with Internet service providers to thwart malicious
attackers.
Table 2-3 provides the URL for the codes of ethics for the above IT professional
organizations.
TABLE 2-3 Code of ethics for popular IT professional organizations
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Organization URL for code of ethics
Association for Computing Machinery www.acm.org/about/code-of-ethics
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Computer Society (IEEE-CS)
http://seeri.etsu.edu/Codes/TheSECode.htm
Association of Information Technology
Professionals (AITP)
www.aitp.org/?page=Ethics
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security (SANS)
Institute
www.sans.org/security-resources/ethics.php
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Certification
Certification indicates that a professional possesses a particular set of skills, knowledge, or
abilities, in the opinion of the certifying organization. Unlike licensing, which applies only
to people and is required by law, certification can also apply to products (e.g., the Wi-Fi
CERTIFIED logo assures that the product has met rigorous interoperability testing to
ensure that it will work with other Wi-Fi-certified products) and is generally voluntary.
IT-related certifications may or may not include a requirement to adhere to a code of
ethics, whereas such a requirement is standard with licensing.
Numerous companies and professional organizations offer certifications, and opinions
are divided on their value. Many employers view them as a benchmark that indicates
mastery of a defined set of basic knowledge. On the other hand, because certification is
no substitute for experience and doesn’t guarantee that a person will perform well on the
job, some hiring managers are rather cynical about the value of certifications. Most IT
employees are motivated to learn new skills, and certification provides a structured way of
doing so. For such people, completing a certification provides clear recognition and corre-
lates with a plan to help them continue to grow and advance in their careers. Others view
certification as just another means for product vendors to generate additional revenue
with little merit attached.
Deciding on the best IT certification—and even whether to seek a certification—
depends on the individual’s career aspirations, existing skill level, and accessibility to
training. Is certification relevant to your current job or the one to which you aspire? Does
the company offering the certification have a good reputation? What is the current and
potential future demand for skills in this area of certification?
Vendor Certifications
Many IT vendors—such as Cisco, IBM, Microsoft, SAP, and Oracle—offer certification
programs for those who use their products. Workers who successfully complete a program
can represent themselves as certified users of a manufacturer’s product. Depending on the
job market and the demand for skilled workers, some certifications might substantially
improve an IT worker’s salary and career prospects. Certifications that are tied to a ven-
dor’s product are relevant for job roles with very specific requirements or certain aspects
of broader roles. Sometimes, however, vendor certifications are too narrowly focused on
the technical details of the vendor’s technology and do not address more general concepts.
To become certified, one must pass a written exam. Because of legal concerns about
whether other types of exams can be graded objectively, most exams are presented in a
multiple-choice format. A few certifications, such as the Cisco Certified Internetwork
Expert (CCIE) certification, also require a hands-on lab exam that demonstrates skills
and knowledge. It can take years to obtain the necessary experience required for some
certifications. Courses and training material are available to help speed up the preparation
process, but such support can be expensive. Depending on the certification, study materi-
als can cost $1, Industry Association Certifications
There are many available industry certifications in a variety of IT-related subject areas.
Their value varies greatly depending on where people are in their career path, what other
certifications they possess, and the nature of the IT job market. Table 2-4 lists several of
the certifications most in demand by employers.
TABLE 2-4 Certifications in high demand
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Certification Subject matter
Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist Designing and optimizing solutions based
on Microsoft products and technologies
Cisco Certified Internetwork Expert Managing and troubleshooting large
networks
Cisco Certified Network Professional
Security
Configuring and designing firewalls and the
security settings on routers and switches
CompTIA A+ Performing computer and network mainte-
nance, troubleshooting, and installation—
including addressing security issues
Project Management Institute’s Project
Management Professional (PMP)
Leading and directing projects
Certification requirements generally oblige an individual to have the prerequisite edu-
cation and experience, and to sit for and pass an exam. In order to remain certified, the
individual must typically pay an annual certification fee, earn continuing education cred-
its, and—in some cases—pass a periodic renewal test.
Certifications from industry associations generally require a higher level of experience
and a broader perspective than vendor certifications; however, industry associations often
lag in developing tests that cover new technologies. The trend in IT certification is to move
from purely technical content to a broader mix of technical, business, and behavioral
competencies, which are required in today’s demanding IT roles. This trend is evident in
industry association certifications that address broader roles, such as project management
and network security.
Government Licensing
In the United States, a government license is government-issued permission to engage in
an activity or to operate a business. It is generally administered at the state level and often
requires that the recipient pass a test of some kind. Some professionals must be licensed,
including certified public accountants (CPAs), lawyers, doctors, various types of medical
and daycare providers, and some engineers.
States have enacted legislation to establish licensing requirements and protect public
safety in a variety of fields. For example, Texas passed the Engineering Registration Act
after a tragic school explosion at New London, Texas, in 1937. Under the act and
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
subsequent revisions, only duly licensed people may legally perform engineering services
for the public, and public works must be designed and constructed under the direct
supervision of a licensed professional engineer. People cannot call themselves engineers or
professional engineers unless they are licensed, and violators are subject to legal penalties.
Most states have similar laws.
The Case for Licensing IT Workers
The days of simple, stand-alone information systems are over. Modern systems are highly
complex, interconnected, and critically dependent on one another. Highly integrated
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems help multibillion-dollar companies control
all of their business functions, including forecasting, production planning, purchasing,
inventory control, manufacturing, and distribution. Complex computers and information
systems manage and control the nuclear reactors of power plants that generate electricity.
Medical information systems monitor the vital statistics of hospital patients on critical
life support. Every year, local, state, and federal government information systems are
entrusted with generating and distributing millions of checks worth billions of dollars to
the public.
As a result of the increasing importance of IT in our everyday lives, the development
of reliable, effective information systems has become an area of mounting public concern.
This concern has led to a debate about whether the licensing of IT workers would improve
information systems. Proponents argue that licensing would strongly encourage IT workers
to follow the highest standards of the profession and practice a code of ethics. Licensing
would also allow for violators to be punished. Without licensing, there are no clear, well-
defined requirements for heightened care and no concept of professional malpractice.
Issues Associated with Government Licensing of IT Workers
Australia, Great Britain, and the Canadian provinces of Ontario and British Columbia have
adopted licensing for software engineers. In the United States, the National Council of
Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) has developed a professional exam for
electrical engineers and computer engineers. However, there are many reasons why there
are few international or national licensing programs for IT workers in the United States:
• There is no universally accepted core body of knowledge. The core body of
knowledge for any profession outlines agreed-upon sets of skills and abilities
that all licensed professionals must possess. At present, however, there are no
universally accepted standards for licensing programmers, software engi-
neers, and other IT workers. Instead, various professional societies, state
agencies, and federal governments have developed their own standards.
• It is unclear who should manage the content and administration of licens-
ing exams. How would licensing exams be constructed, and who would be
responsible for designing and administering them? Would someone who
passes a license exam in one state or country be accepted in another state or
country? In a field as rapidly changing as IT, workers must commit to ongo-
ing, continuous education. If an IT worker’s license were to expire every few
years (like a driver’s license), how often would practitioners be required to
prove competence in new practices in order to renew their license? Such questions would normally be answered by the state agency that licenses
other professionals.
• There is no administrative body to accredit professional education pro-
grams. Unlike the American Medical Association for medical schools or the
American Bar Association for law schools, no single body accredits profes-
sional education programs for IT. Furthermore, there is no well-defined,
step-by-step process to train IT workers, even for specific jobs such as
programming. There is not even broad agreement on what skills a good
programmer must possess; it is highly situational, depending on the
computing environment.
• There is no administrative body to assess and ensure competence of indi-
vidual workers. Lawyers, doctors, and other licensed professionals are held
accountable to high ethical standards and can lose their license for failing to
meet those standards or for demonstrating incompetence. The AITP stan-
dards of conduct state that professionals should“take appropriate action in
regard to any illegal or unethical practices that come to [their] attention.
However, [they should] bring charges against any person only when [they]
have reasonable basis for believing in the truth of the allegations and without
any regard to personal interest.” The AITP code addresses the censure issue
much more forcefully than other IT codes of ethics, although it has seldom,
if ever, been used to censure practicing IT workers.
IT Professional Malpractice
Negligence has been defined as not doing something that a reasonable person would do, or
doing something that a reasonable person would not do. Duty of care refers to the obliga-
tion to protect people against any unreasonable harm or risk. For example, people have a
duty to keep their pets from attacking others and to operate their cars safely. Similarly,
businesses must keep dangerous pollutants out of the air and water, make safe products,
and maintain safe operating conditions for employees.
The courts decide whether parties owe a duty of care by applying a reasonable per-
son standard to evaluate how an objective, careful, and conscientious person would have
acted in the same circumstances. Likewise, defendants who have particular expertise or
competence are measured against a reasonable professional standard. For example, in
a medical malpractice suit based on improper treatment of a broken bone, the standard
of measure would be higher if the defendant were an orthopedic surgeon rather than a
general practitioner. In the IT arena, consider a hypothetical negligence case in which
an employee inadvertently destroyed millions of customer records in an Oracle database.
The standard of measure would be higher if the defendant were a licensed, Oracle-
certified database administrator (DBA) with 10 years of experience rather than an
unlicensed systems analyst with no DBA experience or specific knowledge of the
Oracle software.
If a court finds that a defendant actually owed a duty of care, it must then determine
whether the duty was breached. A breach of the duty of care is the failure to act as a rea-
sonable person would act. A breach of duty might consist of an action, such as throwing a
lit cigarette into a fireworks factory and causing an explosion, or a failure to act when
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
there is a duty to do so—for example, a police officer not protecting a citizen from an
attacker.
Professionals who breach the duty of care are liable for injuries that their negligence
causes. This liability is commonly referred to as professional malpractice. For example,
a CPA who fails to use reasonable care, knowledge, skill, and judgment when auditing a
client’s books is liable for accounting malpractice. Professionals who breach this duty
are liable to their patients or clients, and possibly to some third parties.
Courts have consistently rejected attempts to sue individual parties for computer-
related malpractice. Professional negligence can only occur when people fail to perform
within the standards of their profession, and software engineering is not a uniformly
licensed profession in the United States. Because there are no uniform standards against
which to compare a software engineer’s professional behavior, he or she cannot be subject
to malpractice lawsuits.
I T U S E R S
61
Chapter 1 outlined the general topic of how corporations are addressing the increasing
risks of unethical behavior. This section focuses on encouraging employees’ ethical use
of IT, which is an area of growing concern as more companies provide employees with
PCs, tablets, cellphones, and other devices to access to corporate information systems,
data, and the Internet.
Common Ethical Issues for IT Users
This section discusses a few common ethical issues for IT users. Additional ethical issues
will be discussed in future chapters.
Software Piracy
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, software piracy in a corporate setting can sometimes
be directly traceable to IT professionals—they might allow it to happen, or they might
actively engage in it. Corporate IT usage policies and management should encourage users
to report instances of piracy and to challenge its practice. For example, the software
piracy rate in China exceeds 80 percent, so it is clear that the business managers and
IT professionals in that country do not take a strong stand against the practice.
Sometimes IT users are the ones who commit software piracy. A common violation
occurs when employees copy software from their work computers for use at home. When
confronted, the IT user’s argument might be:“I bought a home computer partly so I could
take work home and be more productive; therefore, I need the same software on my home
computer as I have at work.” However, if no one has paid for an additional license to use
the software on the home computer, this is still piracy.
The increasing popularity of the Android smartphone operating system has created a
serious software piracy problem. Some IT end users have figured out how to download
applications from the Android Market Web site without paying for them, and then use the
software or sell it to others. One legitimate Android application developer complained that
his first application was pirated within a month and that the number of downloads from
the pirate’s site were greater than his own. Professional developers become discouraged as
they watch their sales sink while pirates’ sales rocket.35 Inappropriate Use of Computing Resources
Some employees use their computers to surf popular Web sites that have nothing to do
with their jobs, participate in chat rooms, view pornographic sites, and play computer
games. These activities eat away at worker productivity and waste time. Furthermore,
activities such as viewing sexually explicit material, sharing lewd jokes, and sending hate
email could lead to lawsuits and allegations that a company allowed a work environment
conducive to racial or sexual harassment. A survey by the Fawcett Society found that one
in five men admit to viewing porn at work, while a separate study found that 30 percent
of mobile workers are viewing porn on their Web-enabled phones.36,37 Organizations
typically fire frequent pornography offenders and take disciplinary action against less
egregious offenders.
Recently, the executive director of the Pentagon’s Missile Defense Agency issued a
memo to its 8,000 employees warning them to stop using their work computers to access
Internet porn sites. One concern of government officials is that many pornography sites
are infected with computer viruses and other malware; criminals and foreign intelligence
agencies often use such sites as a means to gain access to government and corporate
computer networks. For example, a foreign agent can embed malware capable of stealing
data or opening computer communications ports whenever certain photos or videos are
downloaded to a computer.38
Inappropriate Sharing of Information
Every organization stores vast amounts of information that can be classified as either pri-
vate or confidential. Private data describes individual employees—for example, their salary
information, attendance data, health records, and performance ratings. Private data also
includes information about customers—credit card information, telephone number, home
address, and so on. Confidential information describes a company and its operations,
including sales and promotion plans, staffing projections, manufacturing processes, prod-
uct formulas, tactical and strategic plans, and research and development. An IT user who
shares this information with an unauthorized party, even inadvertently, has violated
someone’s privacy or created the potential that company information could fall into the
hands of competitors. For example, if an employee accessed a coworker’s payroll records
via a human resources computer system and then discussed them with a friend, it would
be a clear violation of the coworker’s privacy.
In late 2010, hundreds of thousands of leaked State Department documents were
posted on the WikiLeaks Web site. As of this writing, it appears that the source of the leaks
was a low-level IT user (an Army private) with access to confidential documents. The
documents revealed details of behind-the-scenes international diplomacy, often divulging
candid comments from world leaders and providing particulars of U.S. tactics in Afghani-
stan, Iran, and North Korea.39 The leaked documents strained relations between the
United States and some of its allies. It is also possible that the incident will lead to less
sharing of sensitive information with the United States because of concerns over further
disclosures.
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Supporting the Ethical Practices of IT Users
The growing use of IT has increased the potential for new ethical issues and problems;
thus, many organizations have recognized the need to develop policies that protect against
abuses. Although no policy can stop wrongdoers, it can set forth the general rights and
responsibilities of all IT users, establish boundaries of acceptable and unacceptable
behavior, and enable management to punish violators. Adherence to a policy can improve
services to users, increase productivity, and reduce costs. Companies can take several of
the following actions when creating an IT usage policy.
Establishing Guidelines for Use of Company Software
Company IT managers must provide clear rules that govern the use of home computers
and associated software. Some companies negotiate contracts with software manufacturers
and provide PCs and software so that IT users can work at home. Other companies help
employees buy hardware and software at corporate discount rates. The goal should be to
ensure that employees have legal copies of all the software they need to be effective,
regardless of whether they work in an office, on the road, or at home.
Defining the Appropriate Use of IT Resources
Companies must develop, communicate, and enforce written guidelines that encourage
employees to respect corporate IT resources and use them to enhance their job perfor-
mance. Effective guidelines allow some level of personal use while prohibiting employees
from visiting objectionable Internet sites or using company email to send offensive or
harassing messages.
Structuring Information Systems to Protect Data and Information
Organizations must implement systems and procedures that limit data access to just those
employees who need it. For example, sales managers may have total access to sales and
promotion databases through a company network, but their access should be limited to
products for which they are responsible. Furthermore, they should be prohibited from
accessing data about research and development results, product formulas, and staffing
projections if they don’t need it to do their jobs.
Installing and Maintaining a Corporate Firewall
A firewall is hardware or software that serves as a barrier between an organization’s net-
work and the Internet; a firewall also limits access to the company’s network based on the
organization’s Internet-usage policy. A firewall can be configured to serve as an effective
deterrent to unauthorized Web surfing by blocking access to specific objectionable Web
sites. (Unfortunately, the number of such sites is continually growing, so it is difficult to
block them all.) A firewall can also serve as an effective barrier to incoming email from
certain Web sites, companies, or users. It can even be programmed to block email with
certain kinds of attachments (for example, Microsoft Word documents), which reduces the
risk of harmful computer viruses.
Table 2-5 provides a manager’s checklist f TABLE 2-5 Manager’s checklist for establishing an IT usage policy
Question Yes No
64
Is there a statement that explains the need for an IT usage policy?
Does the policy provide a clear set of guiding principles for ethical decision
making?
Is it clear how the policy applies to the following types of workers?
• Employees
• Part-time workers
• Temps
• Contractors
Does the policy address the following issues?
• Protection of the data privacy rights of employees, customers,
suppliers, and others
• Control of access to proprietary company data and information
• Use of unauthorized or pirated software
• Employee monitoring, including email, wiretapping and
eavesdropping on phone conversations, computer monitoring,
and surveillance by video
• Respect of the intellectual rights of others, including trade
secrets, copyrights, patents, and trademarks
• Inappropriate use of IT resources, such as Web surfing,
blogging, personal emailing, and other use of computers for
purposes other than business
• The need to protect the security of IT resources through
adherence to good security practices, such as not sharing
user IDs and passwords, using hard-to-guess passwords,
and frequently changing passwords
• The use of the computer to intimidate, harass, or insult others
through abusive language in emails and by other means
Are disciplinary actions defined for IT-related abuses?
Is there a process for communicating the policy to employees?
Is there a plan to provide effective, ongoing training relative to the policy?
Has a corporate firewall been implemented?
Is the corporate firewall maintained and kept up to date?
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Compliance
Compliance means to be in accordance with established policies, guidelines, specifica-
tions, or legislation. Records management software, for example, may be developed in
compliance with the U.S. Department of Defense’s Design Criteria Standard for Electronic
Management Software applications (known as DoD 5015) that defines mandatory
Chapter 2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
functional requirements for records management software used within the Department of
Defense. Commercial software used within an organization should be distributed in com-
pliance with the vendor’s licensing agreement.
In the legal system, compliance usually refers to behavior in accordance with legisla-
tion—such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, which established requirements for inter-
nal controls to govern the creation and documentation of accurate and complete financial
statements, or the U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA), which requires employers to ensure the security and privacy of employee
healthcare data. Failure to be in compliance to specific pieces of legislation can lead to
criminal or civil penalties specified in that legislation.
Failure to be in compliance with legislation can also lead to lawsuits or government
fines. For instance, the California Online Privacy Protection Act of 2003 requires
“commercial operators of online services, including mobile and social apps, which collect
personally identifiable information from Californians, to conspicuously post a privacy
policy,” according to the California Attorney General’s office. Such a policy must outline
what data is gathered, for what purposes the data is being collected, and with whom the
data may be shared. Developers of mobile applications face fines of up to $2,500 for every
noncompliant application that is downloaded. Several organizations, including Delta,
United Airlines, and Open Table, were notified by the Attorney General’s office in late
2012 that they were not in compliance and were given 30 days to provide specific plans
and a timeline for becoming compliant with the law.40
Demonstrating compliance with multiple government and industry regulations, many
with similar but sometimes conflicting requirements, can be a major challenge. As a result,
many organizations have implemented specialized software to track and record compli-
ance actions, hired management consultants to provide advice and training, and even
created a new position, the chief compliance officer (CCO), to deal with the issues.
In 1972, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) recommended that publicly
held organizations establish audit committees.41 The audit committee of a board of direc-
tors provides assistance to the board in fulfilling its responsibilities with respect to the
oversight of the following areas of activity:
• The quality and integrity of the organization’s accounting and reporting
practices and controls, including the financial statements and reports
• The organization’s compliance with legal and regulatory requirements
• The qualifications, independence, and performance of the company’s
independent auditor (a certified public accountant who provides a company
with an accountant’s opinion but who is not otherwise associated with the
company)
• The performance of the company’s internal audit team
In some cases, audit committees have uncovered violations of law and reported their
findings to appropriate law enforcement agencies. For example, the audit committee of
Sensata Technology (which designs, manufactures, and distributes electronic sensors and
controls) conducted an investigation into whether certain company officials had violated
foreign bribery laws in connection with a business deal in China. As a result of that inves-
tigation, the audit committee reported possibl In addition to an audit committee, most organizations also have an internal audit
department whose primary responsibilities are to
• Determine that internal systems and controls are adequate and effective
• Verify the existence of company assets and maintain proper safeguards over
their protection
• Measure the organization’s compliance with its own policies and procedures
• Ensure that institutional policies and procedures, appropriate laws, and good
practices are followed
• Evaluate the adequacy and reliability of information available for manage-
ment decision making
Although the members of the internal audit team are not typically experts in detecting
and investigating financial statement fraud, they can offer advice on how to develop and
test policies and procedures that result in transactions being recorded in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). This can go a long way toward deterring
fraud related to an organization’s financial statements. Quite often in cases of financial
statement fraud, senior management (including members of the audit committee) ignored
or tried to suppress the recommendations of the internal audit team, especially when red
flags were raised.
The audit committee and members of the internal audit team have a major role in
ensuring that both the IT organization and IT users are in compliance with the various

C H A P T E R 3
C O M P U T E R C R I M E
A N D I N T E R N E T
Q U O T E
The most dangerous criminal may be the man gifted with reason, but with no morals.
—Martin Luther King, Jr.
V I G N E T T E
The Reveton Ransomware Attacks
In August 2012, the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), a partnership between the FBI and the
National White Collar Crime Center, was inundated with reports of a new type of cybercrime. Victims
across the United States reported that while searching the Internet, their computers locked up, and they
received the following message, purportedly from the FBI:“This operating system is locked due to the vio-
lation of the federal laws of the United States of America! (Article 1, Section 8, Clause 8; Article 202; Arti-
cle 210 of the Criminal Code of U.S.A. provides for a deprivation of liberty for four to twelve years.)” The
message then accused the victim either of visiting pornography Web sites or of distributing copyrighted
content. Victims were told they could unlock their computers and avoid prosecution by paying a fine of
$200 within 72 hours of receiving the message. The message came replete with the official FBI logo.1
The incident pointed to a steep rise in ransomware attacks. Ransomware is malware that dis-
ables a computer or smartphone until the victim pays a fee, or ransom. Unlike other viruses, the Reveton version of ransomware is not activated by opening a file or an attachment. Rather it is an
example of“drive-by malware,” viruses that download automatically when a user visits an infected
Web site.2
The FBI immediately issued an alert, but within a month, cybersecurity experts had identified 16
variants of the ransomware. These viruses had infected 68,000 unique IP addresses. It is estimated
that on an average day, about 170 victims paid the $200 fee and received valid unlock codes.3 The
compromised computers could not be fixed through the installation or updating of antivirus software
because the computer was locked. Because so many home PC owners fail to back up their systems
regularly, many victims faced losing a significant amount of data. The $200 fee itself was low enough
to encourage payment. A visit to a professional IT service to repair the damage could potentially cost
the same amount and take more time to resolve. A quick payment through a prepaid money card sys-
tem, such as MoneyPak, could save the victim a lot of trouble.
The United States was not the first country to be hit by these attacks. In early 2012, criminal
gangs targeted France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Ransomware attacks first broke out in
Russia in 2009. Since that time, they have spread to almost every country on the globe, hitting the
United States and Japan especially hard. Symantec, an IT security company, estimates that gangs
are extorting over $5 million per year from online victims.4 The rise of ransomware attacks is, no
doubt, due in part to their success. In France, for example, almost 4 percent of victims coughed up
the ransom money during a non-Reveton scam.5
The Reveton ransomware is delivered by the popular Russian-language Citadel malware toolkit.
The latest version of Citadel can also grab passwords from Web browsers and change Web sites to
trick users into handing over their login information.6
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
In December 2012, the United Kingdom arrested three people they believed were involved in the
Reveton ransomware attacks.7 Finding the perpetrators, however, is unusual and is not the most
effective way to combat this crime. Law enforcement agencies and IT security companies have
urged the public to take measures to prevent themselves from falling victim to such attacks—by keep-
ing software such as Java, Acrobat Reader, Adobe Flash, Windows, and their browser software
updated. An early Reveton ransomware attack made use of a vulnerability in a version of Java that
had just been patched a month prior.8 Computer users can also avoid infections by using security
software that identifies suspicious Web sites, and by not clicking online ads from dubious compa-
nies.9 Perhaps, however, the best way to avoid the spread of these attacks is to encourage victims
to report the crime and to refuse to comply with the ransom demands.
83
Questions to Consider
1. Why are ransomware attacks on the rise?
2. What can you do to prevent ransomware attacks on your own computer?
3. How do you think victims should respond to ransomware attacks? Do they have an ethical
obligation to future victims?
L E A R N I N G O B J E C T I V E S
As you read this chapter, consider the following questions:
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. What key trade-offs and ethical issues are associated with the
safeguarding of data and information systems?
Why has there been a dramatic increase in the number of computer-
related security incidents in recent years?
What are the most common types of computer security attacks?
Who are the primary perpetrators of computer crime, and what are their
objectives?
What are the key elements of a multilayer process for managing security
vulnerabilities based on the concept of reasonable assurance?
What actions must be taken in response to a security incident?
What is computer forensics, an 84
I T S E C U R I T Y I N C I D E N T S : A M A J O R
C O N C E R N
The security of information technology used in business is of utmost importance.
Confidential business data and private customer and employee information must be
safeguarded, and systems must be protected against malicious acts of theft or disruption.
Although the necessity of security is obvious, it must often be balanced against other
business needs. Business managers, IT professionals, and IT users all face a number of
ethical decisions regarding IT security, such as the following:
• If a firm is a victim of a computer crime, should it pursue prosecution of the
criminals at all costs, maintain a low profile to avoid the negative publicity,
inform its affected customers, or take some other action?
• How much effort and money should be spent to safeguard against computer
crime? (In other words, how safe is safe enough?)
• If a company realizes that it has produced software with defects that make it
possible for hackers to attack customer data and computers, what actions
should it take?
• What should be done if recommended computer security safeguards make
conducting business more difficult for customers and employees, resulting in
lost sales and increased costs?
Table 3-1 shows the occurrence of common computer security incidents at 149 U.S.-based
organizations that responded to the 2010/2011 CSI Computer Crime and Security Survey.
TABLE 3-1 Most common computer-related security incidents
Source Line: “2010/11 Computer Security Institute Computer Crime & Security Survey,” courtesy of the
Computer Security Institute.
Why Computer Incidents Are So Prevalent
In today’s computing environment of increasing complexity, higher user expectations,
expanding and changing systems, and growing reliance on software with known vulner-
abilities, it is no wonder that the number, variety, and impact of security incidents are
increasing dramatically. Computer security incidents occur around the world with
personal computer users in developing countries being exposed to the greatest risk of
Type of incident Percent of organizations that
experienced this type of incident
2008 2009 2010
Malware infection 50% 64% 67%
Being fraudulently represented as the sender of email
messages requesting personal information
31% 34% 39%
Laptop or mobile hardware loss 42% 42% 34%
Employee abuse of Internet access or email (e.g., accessing
pornography or use of pirated software)
44% 30% 25%
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
their computers being infected by malware. Table 3-2 shows the ranking of the best and
worst countries in terms of percent of computers infected by malware as determined by
Kaspersky Lab, a provider of computer security software and services.
85
Countries with highest rate of infected computers Countries with lowest rate of infected computers
Country Rate Country Rate
Sudan 70% Japan 6%
Bangladesh 64% Germany 9%
Iraq 62% Switzerland 10%
Rwanda 57% Luxembourg 10%
Nepal 56% Denmark 11%
TABLE 3-2 Country ranking based on percent of infected computers
Source Line: Stefan Tanase,“Q1/2011 Malware Report,” Kaspersky Lab, May 17, 2011.
Separately, the Business Software Alliance recently analyzed 24 countries represent-
ing the major users of information and communications technology in the world. The
countries were rated based on data privacy, cybersecurity, cybercrime control, protection
of intellectual property, IT infrastructure, free trade, technology interoperability, and the
compatibility of country criminal laws with international standards regarding computer
crime. Japan was the highest ranked country—with Australia, Germany, the United States,
and France also rated highly. Brazil was rated dead last, primarily because it has no law
that guarantees the privacy of data transfer, and its laws against cybercrime are very
weak. It is estimated that in 2011, computer hackers stole over $1 billion (USD) from
businesses in Brazil—32 percent of Brazilian businesses were victims of cyberattacks.10
Increasing Complexity Increases Vulnerability
The computing environment has become enormously complex. Networks, computers,
operating systems, applications, Web sites, switches, routers, and gateways are intercon-
nected and driven by hundreds of millions of lines of code. This environment continues to
increase in complexity every day. The number of possible entry points to a network
expands continually as more devices are added, increasing the possibility of security
breaches.
To further complicate matters, workers in many organizations operate in a cloud
computing environment in which software and data storage are services provided via the
Internet (“the cloud”); the services are run on another organization’s computer hardware
and are accessed via a Web browser. This represents a significant change in how data is
stored, accessed, and transferred, and it raises many security concerns. The unmanaged
employee use of cloud services (e.g., the use of a file-sharing Web site to transfer large
documents to clients or suppliers) represents a significant risk. IT and business managers
should insist that employees choose from a list of validated cloud services to avoid poten-
tial issues. Table 3-3 provides some key question TABLE 3-3 Questions to ask when evaluating cloud services
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Question Yes No
Are the interfaces between the cloud service and users secure, with appropriate
levels of access control?
Is data encrypted as it travels over the Internet?
Does the service provide secure storage and access control over data stored in
the cloud?
Does the service provide backup capabilities in the event that a human-caused
or natural disaster renders the primary service unusable?
Is the cloud service provider reputable and financially viable?
Virtualization also introduces further complications into today’s computer environ-
ment. Virtualization software operates in a software layer that runs on top of the
operating system. It enables multiple virtual machines—each with their own operating
system—to run on a single computer. Each of these virtual machines performs as if it is
a separate computer, completing required tasks for the users and applications assigned
to that virtual machine. Virtualization takes advantage of the fact that most physical
servers utilize less than 10 percent of their hardware capacity. With virtualization, the
workload from multiple physical servers can be handled by separate virtual machines
on a single physical server. Virtualization thus increases resource sharing and system
utilization, greatly reducing the number of servers required to handle an organization’s
processing needs. Fewer servers mean less computing space and less power is required
to operate and cool the servers. Thus, virtualization lowers costs and reduces space
requirements.11 However, operating in a virtual environment greatly complicates the
operating environment and raises the potential harm if a single virtualized server is
compromised by a hacker.
Higher Computer User Expectations
Today, time means money, and the faster computer users can solve a problem, the sooner
they can be productive. As a result, computer help desks are under intense pressure to
respond very quickly to users’ questions. Under duress, help desk personnel sometimes
forget to verify users’ identities or to check whether they are authorized to perform a
requested action. In addition, even though most have been warned against doing so, some
computer users share their login ID and password with other coworkers who have forgot-
ten their own passwords. This can enable workers to gain access to information systems
and data for which they are not authorized.
Expanding and Changing Systems Introduce New Risks
Business has moved from an era of stand-alone computers, in which critical data was
stored on an isolated mainframe computer in a locked room, to an era in which personal
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
computers connect to networks with millions of other computers, all capable of sharing
information. Businesses have moved quickly into e-commerce, mobile computing,
collaborative work groups, global business, and interorganizational information systems.
Information technology has become ubiquitous and is a necessary tool for organizations
to achieve their goals. However, it is increasingly difficult to keep up with the pace of
technological change, successfully perform an ongoing assessment of new security risks,
and implement approaches for dealing with them.
87
Bring Your Own Device
Bring your own device (BYOD) is a business policy that permits, and in some cases
encourages, employees to use their own mobile devices (smartphones, tablets, or laptops)
to access company computing resources and applications, including email, corporate
databases, the corporate intranet, and the Internet. Proponents of BYOD say it improves
employee productivity by allowing workers to use devices with which they are already
familiar—while also helping to create an image of a company as a flexible and progressive
employer. Most companies have found they simply cannot entirely prevent employees
from using their own devices to perform work functions. However, this practice raises
many potential security issues as it is highly likely that such devices are also used for
nonwork activity (browsing Web sites, blogging, shopping, visiting social networks, and
so on) that exposes them to malware much more frequently than a device used strictly
for business purposes. That malware may then be spread throughout the company.
In addition, BYOD makes it extremely difficult for IT organizations to adequately
safeguard additional portable devices with various operating systems and a myriad of
applications.
Increased Reliance on Commercial Software with Known Vulnerabilities
In computing, an exploit is an attack on an information system that takes advantage of a
particular system vulnerability. Often this attack is due to poor system design or imple-
mentation. Once the vulnerability is discovered, software developers create and issue a
“fix,” or patch, to eliminate the problem. Users of the system or application are responsible
for obtaining and installing the patch, which they can usually download from the Web.
(These fixes are in addition to other maintenance and project work that software developers
perform.) For example, a critical vulnerability was discovered in Oracle’s Java 7 software
that made it possible for a hacker to break into computers. Oracle released an emergency
software fix to correct this problem.12
Any delay in installing a patch exposes the user to a potential security breach. The
need to install a fix to prevent a hacker from taking advantage of a known system vulner-
ability can create an ethical dilemma for system support personnel trying to balance a
busy work schedule. Should they install a patch that, if left uninstalled, could lead to a
security breach or should they complete assigned project work so that the anticipated
project savings and benefits from the project can begin to accrue on schedule? Since
2006, the number of new software vulnerabilities identified ha TABLE 3-4 Total number of new software vulnerabilities identified annually
Source Line: “Internet Security Threat Report: 2011 Trends,” Symantec, April 2012, www.symantec.com/
content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/b-istr_main_report_2011_21239364.en-us.pdf.
Clearly, it can be difficult to keep up with all the required patches. Of special concern
is a zero-day attack that takes place before the security community or software developer
knows about the vulnerability or has been able to repair it. One would hope that the dis-
coverer of a zero-day vulnerability would provide his knowledge to the original software
manufacturer so that a fix can be created for the problem. However, in some cases,
this knowledge is sold on the black market to cyberterrorists, governments, or large
organizations that may then use it themselves in attacks on the computers of a rival.
Zero-day exploits can command prices as high as $250,000.13
U.S. companies increasingly rely on commercial software with known vulnerabilities.
Even when vulnerabilities are exposed, many corporate IT organizations prefer to use
already installed software“as is” rather than implement security fixes that will either
make the software harder to use or eliminate“nice-to-have” features suggested by current
users or potential customers that will help sell the software.
Types of Exploits
There are numerous types of computer attacks, with new varieties being invented all the
time. This section discusses some of the more common attacks, including the virus,
worm, Trojan horse, spam, distributed denial-of-service, rootkit, phishing, spear-phishing,
smishing, and vishing.
While we usually think of such exploits being aimed at computers, smartphones such
as Apple’s iPhone, Research In Motion’s BlackBerry, and numerous smartphones based on
Google’s Android operating system continue to become more computer capable. Increas-
ingly, smartphone users store an array of personal identity information on their devices,
including credit card numbers and bank account numbers. Smartphones are used to surf
the Web and transact business electronically. The more people use their smartphones for
these purposes, the more attractive these devices become as a target for cyberthieves. As
discussed in the opening vignette, ransomware is a form of malware, which when down-
loaded onto a smartphone, takes control of the device and its data until the owner agrees
to pay a ransom to the attacker.14 Another form of smartphone malware runs up charges
on users’ accounts by automatically sending messages to numbers that charge fees upon
receipt of a message.15
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Viruses
Computer virus has become an umbrella term for many types of malicious code.
Technically, a virus is a piece of programming code, usually disguised as something else,
that causes a computer to behave in an unexpected and usually undesirable manner.
Often a virus is attached to a file, so that when the infected file is opened, the virus
executes. Other viruses sit in a computer’s memory and infect files as the computer opens,
modifies, or creates them. Most viruses deliver a“payload,” or malicious software that
causes the computer to perform in an unexpected way. For example, the virus may be
programmed to display a certain message on the computer’s display screen, delete or
modify a certain document, or reformat the hard drive.
A true virus does not spread itself from computer to computer. A virus is spread to
other machines when a computer user opens an infected email attachment, downloads an
infected program, or visits infected Web sites. In other words, viruses spread by the action
of the“infected” computer user.
Macro viruses have become a common and easily created form of virus. Attackers use
an application macro language (such as Visual Basic or VBScript) to create programs that
infect documents and templates. After an infected document is opened, the virus is exe-
cuted and infects the user’s application templates. Macros can insert unwanted words,
numbers, or phrases into documents or alter command functions. After a macro virus
infects a user’s application, it can embed itself in all future documents created with the
application. The“WM97/Resume.A” virus is a Word macro virus spread via email with
the subject line“Resume - Janet Simons.” If the email recipient clicks on the attachment,
the virus deletes all data in the recipient’s mapped drives.
Worms
Unlike a computer virus, which requires users to spread infected files to other users, a
worm is a harmful program that resides in the active memory of the computer and dupli-
cates itself. Worms differ from viruses in that they can propagate without human inter-
vention, often sending copies of themselves to other computers by email.
The negative impact of a worm attack on an organization’s computers can be consid-
erable—lost data and programs, lost productivity due to workers being unable to use their
computers, additional lost productivity as workers attempt to recover data and programs,
and lots of effort for IT workers to clean up the mess and restore everything to as close to
normal as possible. The cost to repair the damage done by each of the Code Red, SirCam,
and Melissa worms was estimated to exceed $1 billion, with that of the Conficker, Storm,
and ILOVEYOU worms totaling well over $5 billion.16,17
Trojan Horses
A Trojan horse is a program in which malicious code is hidden inside a seemingly harm-
less program. The program’s harmful payload might be designed to enable the hacker to
destroy hard drives, corrupt files, control the computer remotely, launch attacks against
other computers, steal passwords or Social Security numbers, or spy on users by recording
keystrokes and transmitting them to a server operated by a third party.
A Trojan horse can be delivered as an email attachment, downloaded from a Web site,
or contracted via a removable media device such as a CD/DVD or USB memory stick. Once an unsuspecting user executes the program that hosts the Trojan horse, the
malicious payload is automatically launched as well—with no telltale signs. Common host
programs include screen savers, greeting card systems, and games.
Win-7 Anti-Virus 2012 is a fake antivirus tool that infiltrates users’ computers through
the use of a Trojan horse. Once on a user’s computer, the fake tool simulates a system
scan and purports to find numerous infections of malware. It claims it can remove these
infections if you purchase the tool by providing your credit card information.18
Another type of Trojan horse is a logic bomb, which executes when it is triggered by a
specific event. For example, logic bombs can be triggered by a change in a particular file,
by typing a specific series of keystrokes, or by a specific time or date.
Spam
Email spam is the abuse of email systems to send unsolicited email to large numbers of
people. Most spam is a form of low-cost commercial advertising, sometimes for question-
able products such as pornography, phony get-rich-quick schemes, and worthless stock.
Spam is also an extremely inexpensive method of marketing used by many legitimate
organizations. For example, a company might send email to a broad cross section of
potential customers to announce the release of a new product in an attempt to increase
initial sales. Spam is also used to deliver harmful worms and other malware.
The cost of creating an email campaign for a product or service is several hundred to a few
thousand dollars, compared with tens of thousands of dollars for direct-mail campaigns. In
addition, email campaigns take only a couple of weeks to develop, compared with three months
or more for direct-mail campaigns, and the turnaround time for feedback averages 48 hours for
email as opposed to weeks for direct mail. However, the benefits of spam to companies can be
largely offset by the public’s generally negative reaction to receiving unsolicited ads.
Spam forces unwanted and often objectionable material into email boxes, detracts
from the ability of recipients to communicate effectively due to full mailboxes and relevant
emails being hidden among many unsolicited messages, and costs Internet users and ser-
vice providers millions of dollars annually. It takes users time to scan and delete spam
email, a cost that can add up if they pay for Internet connection charges on an hourly
basis. It also costs money for Internet service providers (ISPs) and online services to
transmit spam, which is reflected in the rates charged to all subscribers.
The Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and Marketing
(CAN-SPAM) Act went into effect in January 2004. The act says that it is legal to spam,
provided the messages meet a few basic requirements—spammers cannot disguise their
identity by using a false return address, the email must include a label specifying that it
is an ad or a solicitation, and the email must include a way for recipients to indicate that
they do not want future mass mailings. Despite CAN-SPAM and other measures, the
percentage of spam in email messages averaged 68 percent in October 2012, according
to Securelist, a blog run by the computer security firm Kaspersky Labs.19
Many companies—including Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo!—offer free email services.
Spammers often seek to use email accounts from such major, free, and reputable Web-based
email service providers, as their spam can be sent at no charge and is less likely to be
blocked. Spammers can defeat the registration process of the free email services by launching
a coordinated bot attack that can sign up for thousands of email accounts. These accounts are
then used by the spammers to send thousands of untraceable email messages for free.
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
A partial solution to this problem is the use of CAPTCHA to ensure that only humans
obtain free accounts. CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing Test to Tell Com-
puters and Humans Apart) software generates and grades tests that humans can pass but
all but the most sophisticated computer programs cannot. For example, humans can read
the distorted text in Figure 3-1, but simple computer programs cannot.
91
FIGURE 3-1 Example of CAPTCHA
Source Line: CAPTCHA example from www.recaptcha.net. Courtesy of Carnegie Mellon University.
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) Attacks
A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack is one in which a malicious hacker takes
over computers via the Internet and causes them to flood a target site with demands for
data and other small tasks. A distributed denial-of-service attack does not involve infiltra-
tion of the targeted system. Instead, it keeps the target so busy responding to a stream of
automated requests that legitimate users cannot get in—the Internet equivalent of dialing
a telephone number repeatedly so that all other callers hear a busy signal. The targeted
machine“holds the line open” while waiting for a reply that never comes, and eventually
the requests exhaust all resources of the target, as illustrated in Figure 3-2.
The software to initiate a denial-of-service attack is simple to use, and over 55 DDoS
tools are readily available at a variety of hacker sites.20 A tiny program is downloaded
surreptitiously from the attacker’s computer to dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of
computers all over the world. The term botnet is used to describe a large group of such
computers, which are controlled from one or more remote locations by hackers, without
the knowledge or consent of their owners. The collective processing capacity of some bot-
nets exceeds that of the world’s most powerful supercomputers. Based on a command by
the attacker or at a preset time, the botnet computers (called zombies) go into action,
each sending a simple request for access to the target site again and again—dozens of
times per second. The target computers are so overwhelmed by requests for service that
legitimate users are unable to“get through” to the target computer. Banks and other
e-commerce Web sites are frequent targets of botnets. Both the Bank of America and
Chase banks were hit with a DDoS attack in the fall of 2012.21 Computer A
Response
Waiting for reply from A
Request
Computer B
Response
Waiting for reply from B
Request
Computer C
Response
Waiting for reply from C
Request
Computer D
Response
Waiting for reply from D
Request
Computer E
Response
Waiting for reply from E
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 3-2 Distributed denial-of-service attack
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Botnets are also frequently used to distribute spam and malicious code. The Grum
botnet was first detected in 2008 and operated until 2012 when it was brought down by
cybercrime fighters. Grum infected several hundred thousand computers around the world.
It generated prodigious amounts of spam advertising cheap pharmaceutical products. At its
peak, Grum is estimated to have been responsible for 35 percent of the world’s spam.22
Rootkits
A rootkit is a set of programs that enables its user to gain administrator-level access to a
computer without the end user’s consent or knowledge. Once installed, the attacker can
gain full control of the system and even obscure the presence of the rootkit from legiti-
mate system administrators. Attackers can use the rootkit to execute files, access logs,
monitor user activity, and change the computer’s configuration. Rootkits are one part of a
blended threat, consisting of the dropper, loader, and rootkit. The dropper code gets the
rootkit installation started and can be activated by clicking on a link to a malicious Web
site in an email or opening an infected PDF file. The dropper launches the loader program
and then deletes itself. The loader loads the rootkit into memory; at that point, the
computer has been compromised. Rootkits are designed so cleverly that it is difficult even
to discover if they are installed on a computer. The fundamental problem with trying
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
to detect a rootkit is that the operating system currently running cannot be trusted to
provide valid test results. Here are some symptoms of rootkit infections:
• The computer locks up or fails to respond to input from the keyboard or mouse.
• The screen saver changes without any action on the part of the user.
• The taskbar disappears.
• Network activities function extremely slowly.
When it is determined that a computer has been infected with a rootkit, there is little
to do but reformat the disk; reinstall the operating system and all applications; and recon-
figure the user’s settings, such as mapped drives. This can take hours, and the user may be
left with a basic working machine, but all locally held data and settings may be lost.
A recent rootkit, labeled the“2012 rootkit virus,” is a nasty piece of malware that
deletes information from a computer and makes it impossible to run some applications,
such as Microsoft Word. The longer the rootkit is present, the more damage it causes. The
virus asks users to install what appears to be a legitimate update to their antivirus software
or some other application. By the time the user sees the prompt to install the software, it
is too late, the computer has already been infected by the rootkit.23
Phishing
Phishing is the act of fraudulently using email to try to get the recipient to reveal personal
data. In a phishing scam, con artists send legitimate-looking emails urging the recipient to
take action to avoid a negative consequence or to receive a reward. The requested action
may involve clicking on a link to a Web site or opening an email attachment. These
emails, such as the one shown in Figure 3-3, lead consumers to counterfeit We Savvy users often become suspicious and refuse to enter data into the fake Web sites;
however, sometimes just accessing the Web site can trigger an automatic and unnoticeable
download of malicious software to a computer. Citibank, eBay, and PayPal are among the
Web sites that phishers spoof most frequently. It is estimated that .03 percent of all emails
sent in October 2012 were phishing attacks.24
Spear-phishing is a variation of phishing in which the phisher sends fraudulent emails
to a certain organization’s employees. It is known as spear-phishing because the attack is
much more precise and narrow, like the tip of a spear. The phony emails are designed to
look like they came from high-level executives within the organization. Employees are
directed to a fake Web site and then asked to enter personal information, such as name,
Social Security number, and network passwords. Botnets have become the primary means
for distributing phishing scams.
Strategic Forecasting (commonly referred to as Stratfor) is an intelligence analysis
firm whose clients include the U.S. Army, the Department of Defense, and military con-
tractor Lockheed Martin. A hacker group broke into the firm’s network and stole informa-
tion on thousands of email accounts. This information was used to initiate spear-phishing
attacks on employees of the firm’s clients. The emails, which were designed to look as if
they came from Stratfor, directed recipients to a Web site that looked like the Stratfor
Web site and instructed them to enter private information. In addition, the emails were
laced with malware and other harmful attachments.25
Smishing and Vishing
Smishing is another variation of phishing that involves the use of Short Message Service (SMS)
texting. In a smishing scam, people receive a legitimate-looking text message on their phone
telling them to call a specific phone number or to log on to a Web site. This is often done under
the guise that there is a problem with their bank account or credit card that requires immediate
attention. However, the phone number or Web site is phony and is used to trick unsuspecting
victims into providing personal information such as a bank account number, personal
identification number, or credit card number. This information can be used to steal money
from victims’ bank accounts, charge purchases on their credit cards, or open new accounts.
In some cases, if victims log on to a Web site, malicious software is downloaded onto their
phones, providing criminals with access to information stored on the phones. The number of
smishing scams increases around the holidays as people use their cell phones to make online
purchases. Vishing is similar to smishing except that the victims receive a voice mail telling
them to call a phone number or access a Web site. Here are two examples of smishing crimes:
• Account holders at a credit union were sent a text about an account problem
and were told to call a phone number provided in the text. If they did so,
they were asked to provide personal information that allowed criminals to
steal funds from their accounts within 10 minutes of the phone call.
• Bank customers received a text stating that it was necessary to reactivate their
automated teller machine (ATM) card. Those who called the phone number in
the text were asked to provide their ATM card number, PIN, and expiration
date. Thousands of victims had money stolen from their accounts.26
Financial institutions, credit card companies, and other organizations whose custo-
mers may be targeted by criminals in this manner need to be on the alert for phishing,
smishing, and vishing scams. They must be prepared to act quickly and decisively without
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
alarming their customers if such a scam is detected. Recommended action steps for insti-
tutions and organizations include the following:
• Companies should educate their customers about the dangers of phishing,
smishing, and vishing through letters, recorded messages for those calling
into the company’s call center, and articles on the company’s Web site.
• Call center service employees should be trained to detect customer com-
plaints that indicate a scam is being perpetrated. They should attempt to
capture key pieces of information, such as the callback number the customer
was directed to use, details of the phone message or text message, and the
type of information requested.
• Customers should be notified immediately if a scam occurs. This can be done
via a recorded message for customers phoning the call center, working with
local media to place a news article in papers serving the area of the attack,
placing a banner on the institution’s Web page, and even displaying posters in
bank drive-through and lobby areas.
• If it is determined that the calls are originating from within the United States,
companies should report the scam to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
• Institutions can also try to notify the telecommunications carrier for the
particular phone number that victims are requested to call, to request that
they shut down that number.27
they shut down that number.27
95
Types of Perpetrators
The people who launch these kinds of computer attacks include thrill seekers wanting a
challenge, common criminals looking for financial gain, industrial spies trying to gain a
competitive advantage, and terrorists seeking to cause destruction to further their cause.
Each type of perpetrator has different objectives and access to varying resources, and each
is willing to accept different levels of risk to accomplish his or her objective. Each perpe-
trator makes a decision to act in an unethical manner to achieve his or her own personal
objectives. Knowing the profile of each set of likely attackers, as shown in Table 3-5, is the
first step toward establishing effective countermeasures.
TABLE 3-5 Classifying perpetrators of computer crime
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Type of perpetrator Typical motives
Hackers Test limits of system and/or gain publicity
Crackers Cause problems, steal data, and corrupt systems
Malicious insiders Gain financially and/or disrupt company’s information systems and business operations
Industrial spies Capture trade secrets and gain competitive advantage
Cybercriminals Gain financially
Hacktivists Promote political ideology
Cyberterrorists Destroy infrastructure components Hackers and Crackers
Hackers test the limitations of information systems out of intellectual curiosity—to see
whether they can gain access and how far they can go. They have at least a basic under-
standing of information systems and security features, and much of their motivation
comes from a desire to learn even more. The term hacker has evolved over the years,
leading to its negative connotation today rather than the positive one it used to have.
While there is still a vocal minority who believe that hackers perform a service by identi-
fying security weaknesses, most people now believe that a hacker does not have the right
to explore public or private networks.
Some hackers are smart and talented, but many are technically inept and are referred to
as lamers or script kiddies by more skilled hackers. Surprisingly, hackers have a wealth of
available resources to hone their skills—online chat groups, Web sites, downloadable hacker
tools, and even hacker conventions (such as DEFCON, an annual gathering in Las Vegas).
Malicious Insiders
A major security concern for companies is the malicious insider—an ever-present and
extremely dangerous adversary. Companies are exposed to a wide range of fraud risks,
including diversion of company funds, theft of assets, fraud connected with bidding
processes, invoice and payment fraud, computer fraud, and credit card fraud. Not
surprisingly, fraud that occurs within an organization is usually due to weaknesses in its
internal control procedures. As a result, many frauds are discovered by chance and by
outsiders—via tips, through resolving payment issues with contractors or suppliers, or
during a change of management—rather than through control procedures. Often, frauds
involve some form of collusion, or cooperation, between an employee and an outsider.
For example, an employee in Accounts Payable might engage in collusion with a company
supplier. Each time the supplier submits an invoice, the Accounts Payable employee adds
$1,000 to the amount approved for payment. The inflated payment is received by the
supplier, and the two split the extra money.
Insiders are not necessarily employees; they can also be consultants and contractors.
The risk tolerance of insiders depends on whether they are motivated by financial gain,
revenge on their employers, or publicity.
Malicious insiders are extremely difficult to detect or stop because they are often
authorized to access the very systems they abuse. Although insiders are less likely to
attack systems than outside hackers or crackers are, the company’s systems are far more
vulnerable to them. Most computer security measures are designed to stop external
attackers but are nearly powerless against insiders. Insiders have knowledge of individual
systems, which often includes the procedures to gain access to login IDs and passwords.
Insiders know how the systems work and where the weak points are. Their knowledge of
organizational structure and security procedures helps them avoid detection of their
actions.
The Saudi Arabian Oil Company (Aramco) is the state-owned oil company of Saudi
Arabia. It owns approximately one-fifth of the world’s oil reserves and employs more than
55,000 workers in 77 countries.28 In 2012, the firm was a victim of a cyberattack that
erased data on about 30,000 of its personal computers. Security experts believe that the
attack was led by a company insider who had privileged access to Aramco’s network.29
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
There are several steps organizations can take to reduce the potential for attacks from
insiders, including the following:
• Perform a thorough background check as well as psychological and drug
testing of candidates for sensitive positions.
• Establish an expectation of regular and ongoing psychological and drug
testing as a normal routine for people in sensitive positions.
• Carefully limit the number of people who can perform sensitive operations,
and grant only the minimum rights and privileges necessary to perform
essential duties.
• Define job roles and procedures so it is not possible for the same person to
both initiate and approve an action.
• Periodically rotate employees in sensitive positions so that any unusual
procedures can be detected by the replacement.
• Immediately revoke all rights and privileges required to perform old job
responsibilities when someone in a sensitive position moves to a new
position.
• Implement an ongoing audit process to review key actions and procedures.
Organizations must also be concerned about negligent insiders, poorly trained and
inadequately managed employees who mean well but have the potential to cause much
damage by accident.
Industrial Spies
Industrial spies use illegal means to obtain trade secrets from competitors. In the United
States, trade secrets are protected by the Economic Espionage Act of 1996, which makes it
a federal crime to use a trade secret for one’s own benefit or another’s benefit. Trade secrets
are most often stolen by insiders, such as disgruntled employees and exemployees.
Competitive intelligence is legally obtained information gathered using sources
available to the public. Information is gathered from financial reports, trade journals,
public filings, and printed interviews with company officials. Industrial espionage
involves using illegal means to obtain information that is not available to the public.
Participants might place a wiretap on the phones of key company officials, bug a confer-
ence room, or break into a research and development facility to steal confidential test
results. An unethical firm may spend a few thousand dollars to hire an industrial spy to
steal trade secrets that can be worth a thousand times that amount. The industrial spy
avoids taking risks that would expose his employer, as the employer’s reputation (an
intangible but valuable item) would be considerably damaged if the espionage were dis-
covered. Industrial espionage can involve the theft of new product designs, production
data, marketing information, or new software source code. For example, a virus called
“ACAD/Medre.A” was used to steal thousands of blueprints from companies based mainly
in Peru and secretly email them to two Chinese firms. The virus targets AutoCAD soft-
ware used by engineers and industrial designers to create drawings of new products,
equipment, and plant layouts. It is suspected that the virus was initially distributed via
an innocent looking AutoCAD template emailed to Peruvian companies. The virus sends
a copy of every new design to the virus owners, giving them full“access to the designs
even before they go into production.”30 Cybercriminals
Information technology provides a new and highly profitable venue for cybercriminals,
who are attracted to the use of information technology for its ease in reaching millions of
potential victims. Cybercriminals are motivated by the potential for monetary gain and
hack into computers to steal, often by transferring money from one account to another to
another—leaving a hopelessly complicated trail for law enforcement officers to follow.
Cybercriminals also engage in all forms of computer fraud—stealing and reselling credit
card numbers, personal identities, and cell phone IDs. Because the potential for monetary
gain is high, they can afford to spend large sums of money to buy the technical expertise
and access they need from unethical insiders.
The use of stolen credit card information is a favorite ploy of computer criminals.
Fraud rates are highest for merchants who sell downloadable software or expensive items
such as electronics and jewelry (because of their high resale value). Credit card companies
are so concerned about making consumers feel safe while shopping online that many are
marketing new and exclusive zero-liability programs, although the Fair Credit Billing Act
limits consumer liability to only $50 of unauthorized charges. When a charge is made
fraudulently in a retail store, the bank that issued the credit card must pay the fraudulent
charges. For fraudulent credit card transactions over the Internet, the Web merchant
absorbs the cost.
A high rate of disputed transactions, known as charge-backs, can greatly reduce a Web
merchant’s profit margin. However, the permanent loss of revenue caused by lost cus-
tomer trust has far more impact than the costs of fraudulent purchases and bolstering
security. Most companies are afraid to admit publicly that they have been hit by online
fraud or hackers because they don’t want to hurt their reputations.
In a major case of identity theft, MasterCard recently notified financial institutions
that a data breach had occurred at one of its third-party payment processors that
could enable the thieves to duplicate the cards of millions of its cardholders. (A data
breach is the unintended release of sensitive data or the access of sensitive data by
unauthorized individuals.) It is likely that data of Visa card holders was also stolen.
The total number of card holders that might be affected and the banks notified were
not revealed.31
To reduce the potential for online credit card fraud, most e-commerce Web sites use
some form of encryption technology to protect information as it comes in from the con-
sumer. Some also verify the address submitted online against the one the issuing bank has
on file, although the merchant may inadvertently throw out legitimate orders as a result—
for example, a consumer might place a legitimate order but request shipment to a different
address because it is a gift. Another security technique is to ask for a card verification
value (CVV), the three-digit number above the signature panel on the back of a credit
card. This technique makes it impossible to make purchases with a credit card number
stolen online. An additional security option is transaction-risk scoring software, which
keeps track of a customer’s historical shopping patterns and notes deviations from the
norm. For example, say that you have never been to a casino and your credit card infor-
mation is being used at Caesar’s Palace at 2:00 a.m. The transaction-risk score would go
up dramatically, so much so that the transaction might be declined.
Some card issuers are issuing debit and credit cards in the form of smart cards, which
contain a memory chip that is updated with encrypted data every time the card is used.
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
This encrypted data might include the user’s account identification and the amount of credit
remaining. To use a smart card for online transactions, consumers must purchase a card
reader that attaches to their personal computers and enter a personal identification number
to gain access to the account. Although smart cards are used widely in Europe, they are not
as popular in the United States because of the changeover costs for merchants.
Hacktivists and Cyberterrorists
Hacktivism, a combination of the words hacking and activism, is hacking to achieve a politi-
cal or social goal. A cyberterrorist launches computer-based attacks against other computers
or networks in an attempt to intimidate or coerce an organization in order to advance certain
political or social objectives. Cyberterrorists are more extreme in their goals than hacktivists,
although there is no clear demarcation line. Because of the Internet, cyberattacks can easily
originate from foreign countries, making detection and retaliation much more difficult.
Cyberterrorists seek to cause harm rather than gather information, and they use techniques
that destroy or disrupt services. They are extremely dangerous, consider themselves to be at
war, have a very high acceptance of risk, and seek maximum impact.
In late 2012, the hacktivist group Parastoo hacked into the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) network and stole the email addresses of 167 experts working with
the agency. The group then posted an online statement demanding that the experts peti-
tion the IAEA to investigate what it considered to be“beyond-harmful operations” at
Israel’s Negev Nuclear Research Center. Parastoo threatened to expose the whereabouts
of these experts, as well as other personal information, if they failed to act.32
99
Federal Laws for Prosecuting Computer Attacks
Computers came into use in the 1950s. Initially, there were no laws that pertained strictly
to computer-related crimes. For example, if a group of criminals entered a bank and stole
money at gunpoint, they could be captured and charged with robbery—the crime of seiz-
ing property through violence or intimidation. However, by the mid-1970s, it was possible
to access a bank’s computer remotely using a terminal (a keyboard and monitor), modem,
and telephone line. A knowledgeable person could then transfer money (in the form of
computer bits) from accounts in that bank to an account in another bank. This act did not
fit the definition of robbery, and the traditional laws were no longer adequate to punish
criminals who used computer modems.
Over the years, several laws have been enacted to help prosecute those responsible for
computer-related crime; these are summarized in Table 3-6. For example, the USA Patriot
Act defines cyberterrorism as hacking attempts that cause $5,000 in aggregate damage in
one year to medical equipment, or that cause injury to any person. Those convicted of
cyberterrorism are subject to a prison term of 5 to 20 years. (The $5,000 threshold is
quite easy to exceed, and, as a result, many young people who have been involved in what
they consider to be minor computer pranks have found themselves meeting the criteria to
be tried as cyberterrorists.)
Now that we have discussed various types of computer exploits, the people who per-
petrate these exploits, and the laws under which they can be prosecuted, we will discuss
how organizations can take steps to implement a trustworthy computing environment to
defend against such attacks. TABLE 3-6 Federal laws that address computer crime
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Federal law Subject area
USA Patriot Act Defines cyberterrorism and associated penalties
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence
Act (U.S. Code Title 18, Section 1028)
Makes identity theft a federal crime with penalties up
to 15 years imprisonment and a maximum fine of
$250,000
Fraud and Related Activity in Connection
with Access Devices Statute (U.S. Code Title
18, Section 1029)
False claims regarding unauthorized use of credit
cards
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (U.S. Code
Title 18, Section 1030)
Fraud and related activities in association with
computers:
• Accessing a computer without authorization or
exceeding authorized access
• Transmitting a program, code, or command
that causes harm to a computer
• Trafficking of computer passwords
• Threatening to cause damage to a protected
computer
Stored Wire and Electronic Communications
and Transactional Records Access Statutes
(U.S. Code Title 18, Chapter 121)
Unlawful access to stored communications to obtain,
alter, or prevent authorized access to a wire or
electronic communication while it is in electronic
storage
I M P L E M E N T I N G T R U S T W O R T H Y C O M P U T I N G
Trustworthy computing is a method of computing that delivers secure, private, and
reliable computing experiences based on sound business practices—which is what
organizations worldwide are demanding today. Software and hardware manufacturers,
consultants, and programmers all understand that this is a priority for their customers.
For example, Microsoft has pledged to deliver on a trustworthy computing initiative designed
to improve trust in its software products, as summarized in Figure 3-4 and Table 3-7.33
The security of any system or network is a combination of technology, policy, and
people and requires a wide range of activities to be effective. As the Committee on
Improving Cybersecurity Research in the United States wrote in a report for the National
Academy of Sciences,“Society ultimately expects computer systems to be trustworthy—
that is, that they do what is required and expected of them despite environmental disrup-
tion, human user and operator errors, and attacks by hostile parties, and that they not do
other things.”34 A strong security program begins by assessing threats to the organization’s
computers and network, identifying actions that address the most serious vulnerabilities,
and educating end users about the risks involved and the actions they must take to
prevent a security incident. An organization’s IT security group must lead the effort to
prevent security breaches by implementing security policies and procedures, as well as
effectively employing available hardware and software tools. However, no security system
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Trustworthy computing
101
Security Privacy Reliability
Business
integrity
FIGURE 3-4 Microsoft’s four pillars of trustworthy computing
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
TABLE 3-7 Actions taken by Microsoft to support trustworthy computing
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Pillar Actions taken by Microsoft
Security Invest in the expertise and technology required to create a trustworthy environment.
Work with law enforcement agencies, industry experts, academia, and private sectors to
create and enforce secure computing.
Develop trust by educating consumers on secure computing.
Privacy Make privacy a priority in the design, development, and testing of products.
Contribute to standards and policies created by industry organizations and government.
Provide users with a sense of control over their personal information.
Reliability Build systems so that (1) they continue to provide service in the face of internal or
external disruptions; (2) they can be easily restored to a previously known state with no
data loss in the event of a disruption; (3) they provide accurate and timely service
whenever needed; (4) required changes and upgrades do not disrupt them; (5) they
contain minimal software bugs on release; and (6) they work as expected or promised.
Business
integrity
Be responsive—take responsibility for problems and take action to correct them. Be
transparent—be open in dealings with customers, keep motives clear, keep promises,
and make sure customers know where they stand in dealing with the company.
is perfect, so systems and procedures must be monitored to detect a possible intrusion.
If an intrusion occurs, there must be a clear reaction plan that addresses notification,
evidence protection, activity log maintenance, containment, eradication, and recovery.
The following sections discuss these activities. Risk Assessment
Risk assessment is the process of assessing security-related risks to an organization’s
computers and networks from both internal and external threats. Such threats can prevent
an organization from meeting its key business objectives. The goal of risk assessment is to
identify which investments of time and resources will best protect the organization from
its most likely and serious threats. In the context of an IT risk assessment, an asset is
any hardware, software, information system, network, or database that is used by the
organization to achieve its business objectives. A loss event is any occurrence that has
a negative impact on an asset, such as a computer contracting a virus or a Web site
undergoing a distributed denial-of-service attack. Figure 3-5 illustrates a general security
risk assessment process developed by ASIS International.
Identify
assets General Security Risk Assessment
Specify
loss events
Frequency
of events
Anticipated or actual change
Impact of
events
Options to
mitigate
Feasibility of
options
Cost/benefit
analysis
Decision
Reassessment
FIGURE 3-5 General security risk assessment
Source Line: General Security Risk Assessment Guidelines, ASIS International (2003). See the Standards and Guidelines page of
the ASIS International website (www.asisonline.org) for revisions and/or updates. Reprinted by permission.
The steps in a general security risk assessment process are as follows:
• Step 1—Identify the set of IT assets about which the organization is most
concerned. Priority is typically given to those assets that support the
organization’s mission and the meeting of its primary business goals.
• Step 2—Identify the loss events or the risks or threats that could occur, such
as a distributed denial-of-service attack or insider fraud.
• Step 3—Assess the frequency of events or the likelihood of each potential threat;
some threats, such as insider fraud, are more likely to occur than others.
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
• Step 4—Determine the impact of each threat occurring. Would the threat
have a minor impact on the organization, or could it keep the organization
from carrying out its mission for a lengthy period of time?
• Step 5—Determine how each threat can be mitigated so that it becomes much
less likely to occur or, if it does occur, has less of an impact on the organiza-
tion. For example, installing virus protection on all computers makes it much
less likely for a computer to contract a virus. Due to time and resource limita-
tions, most organizations choose to focus on those threats that have a high
(relative to all other threats) frequency and a high (relative to all other threats)
impact. In other words, first address those threats that are likely to occur and
that would have a high negative impact on the organization.
• Step 6—Assess the feasibility of implementing the mitigation options.
• Step 7—Perform a cost-benefit analysis to ensure that your efforts will be
cost effective. No amount of resources can guarantee a perfect security sys-
tem, so organizations must balance the risk of a security breach with the cost
of preventing one. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that
managers must use their judgment to ensure that the cost of control does not
exceed the system’s benefits or the risks involved.
• Step 8—Make the decision on whether or not to implement a particular
countermeasure. If you decide against implementing a particular counter-
measure, you need to reassess if the threat is truly serious and, if so, identify
a less costly countermeasure.
a less costly countermeasure.
103
The general security risk assessment process—and the results of that process—will vary
by organization. Table 3-8 illustrates a risk assessment for a hypothetical organization.
TABLE 3-8 Risk assessment for hypothetical company
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.A completed risk assessment identifies the most dangerous threats to a company and
helps focus security efforts on the areas of highest payoff.
Establishing a Security Policy
A security policy defines an organization’s security requirements, as well as the controls and
sanctions needed to meet those requirements. A good security policy delineates responsibil-
ities and the behavior expected of members of the organization. A security policy outlines
what needs to be done but not how to do it. The details of how to accomplish the goals of
the policy are typically provided in separate documents and procedure guidelines.
The SANS (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute’s Web site offers a number
of security-related policy templates that can help an organization to quickly develop effec-
tive security policies. The templates and other security policy information can be found at
www.sans.org/security-resources/policies. The following is a partial list of the templates
available from the SANS Institute:
• Ethics Policy—This template defines the means to establish a culture of
openness, trust, and integrity in business practices.
• Information Sensitivity Policy—This sample policy defines the requirements
for classifying and securing the organization’s information in a manner
appropriate to its level of sensitivity.
• Risk Assessment Policy—This template defines the requirements and
provides the authority for the information security team to identify, assess,
and remediate risks to the organization’s information infrastructure
associated with conducting business.
• Personal Communication Devices and Voice-mail Policy—This sample pol-
icy describes security requirements for personal communication devices and
voice mail.
Whenever possible, automated system rules should mirror an organization’s written poli-
cies. Automated system rules can often be put into practice using the configuration options in
a software program. For example, if a written policy states that passwords must be changed
every 30 days, then all systems should be configured to enforce this policy automatically.
However, users will often attempt to circumvent security policies or simply ignore them
altogether. For example, manufacturers of network routers urge users to change the default
password of their router when they first set it up. A hacker discovered numerous routers
around the world that are still using the default password and published a list of these routers
and their IP addresses so that anyone can get into the associated network and wreak havoc.35
When applying system security restrictions, there are some trade-offs between ease
of use and increased security; however, when a decision is made to favor ease of use,
security incidents sometimes increase. As security techniques continue to advance in
sophistication, they become more transparent to end users.
The use of email attachments is a critical security issue that should be addressed in
every organization’s security policy. Sophisticated attackers may be able to penetrate a
network via email attachments, regardless of the existence of a firewall and other security
measures. As a result, some companies have chosen to block any incoming mail that has
a file attachment, which greatly reduces their vulnerability. Some companies allow
employees to receive and open email with attachments, but only if the email is expected
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
and from someone known by the recipient. Such a policy can be risky, however, because
worms often use the address book of their victims to generate emails to a target audience.
Another growing area of concern is the use of wireless devices to access corporate email,
store confidential data, and run critical applications, such as inventory management and sales
force automation. Mobile devices such as smartphones can be susceptible to viruses and
worms. However, the primary security threat for mobile devices continues to be loss or theft
of the device. Wary companies have begun to include special security requirements for mobile
devices as part of their security policies. In some cases, users of laptops and mobile devices
must use a virtual private network to gain access to their corporate network.
A virtual private network (VPN) works by using the Internet to relay communica-
tions; it maintains privacy through security procedures and tunneling protocols, which
encrypt data at the sending end and decrypt it at the receiving end. An additional level of
security involves encrypting the originating and receiving network addresses. Because of
the ease of loss or theft, many organizations encrypt all sensitive corporate data stored on
handhelds and laptops. Unfortunately, it is hard to apply a single, simple approach to
securing all handheld devices because so many manufacturers and models exist.
Educating Employees and Contract Workers
An ongoing security problem for companies is creating and enhancing user awareness of
security policies. Employees and contract workers must be educated about the importance
of security so that they will be motivated to understand and follow the security policies.
This can often be accomplished by discussing recent security incidents that affected the
organization. Users must understand that they are a key part of the security system and
that they have certain responsibilities. For example, users must help protect an organiza-
tion’s information systems and data by doing the following:
• Guarding their passwords to protect against unauthorized access to their accounts
• Prohibiting others from using their passwords
• Applying strict access controls (file and directory permissions) to protect
data from disclosure or destruction
• Reporting all unusual activity to the organization’s IT security group
• Taking care to ensure that portable computing and data storage devices are
protected (hundreds of thousands of laptops are lost or stolen per year)
105
Prevention
No organization can ever be completely secure from attack. The key is to implement a
layered security solution to make computer break-ins so difficult that an attacker eventu-
ally gives up. In a layered solution, if an attacker breaks through one layer of security,
there is another layer to overcome. These layers of protective measures are explained in
more detail in the following sections.
Installing a Corporate Firewall
Installation of a corporate firewall is the most common security precaution taken by
businesses. A firewall stands guard between an organization’s internal network an Firewalls can be established through the use of software, hardware, or a combination
of both. Any Internet traffic that is not explicitly permitted into the internal network is
denied entry. Similarly, most firewalls can be configured so that internal network users
can be blocked from gaining access to certain Web sites based on such content as sex and
violence. Most firewalls can also be configured to block instant messaging, access to news-
groups, and other Internet activities.
Installing a firewall can lead to another serious security issue—complacency. For
example, a firewall cannot prevent a worm from entering the network as an email attach-
ment. Most firewalls are configured to allow email and benign-looking attachments to
reach their intended recipient.
Table 3-9 lists some of the top-rated firewall software used to protect personal com-
puters. The software suites below include antivirus, firewall, antispam, parental control,
and phishing protection capabilities and sell for $70 to $90 per single user license.
TABLE 3-9 Top-rated firewall software for personal computers
Source Line: Neil J. Rubenking,“The Best Security Suites of 2013,” PC Magazine, September 19, 2012,
www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2369749,00.asp.
Intrusion Detection Systems
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is software and/or hardware that monitors system
and network resources and activities, and notifies network security personnel when it
detects network traffic that attempts to circumvent the security measures of a networked
computer environment (see Figure 3-6). Such activities usually signal an attempt to
breach the integrity of the system or to limit the availability of network resources.
Knowledge-based approaches and behavior-based approaches are two fundamentally
different approaches to intrusion detection. Knowledge-based intrusion detection systems
contain information about specific attacks and system vulnerabilities and watch for
attempts to exploit these vulnerabilities, such as repeated failed login attempts or recur-
ring attempts to download a program to a server. When such an attempt is detected, an
alarm is triggered. A behavior-based intrusion detection system models normal behavior of
a system and its users from reference information collected by various means. The intru-
sion detection system compares current activity with this model and generates an alarm if
it finds a deviation. Examples include unusual traffic at odd hours or a user in the Human
Resources Department who accesses an accounting program that she has never before
used.
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Messages from IDS routed
to network security team
IDS warns firewall of suspicious traffic. Network
security team and logic in firewall decide what action
to take, such as block all traffic from the source IP
address of the suspicious traffic.
107
Organization’s intrusion
detection system
Internet
Internet traffic
Organization’s network
router sends network traffic
to both IDS and firewall
Organization’s
firewall
Organization’s internal network
FIGURE 3-6 Intrusion detection system
Credit: © Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com.
Installing Antivirus Software on Personal Computers
Antivirus software should be installed on each user’s personal computer to scan a compu-
ter’s memory and disk drives regularly for viruses. Antivirus software scans for a specific
sequence of bytes, known as a virus signature, that indicates the presence of a specific
virus. If it finds a virus, the antivirus software informs the user, and it may clean, delete,
or quarantine any files, directories, or disks affected by the malicious code. Good antivirus
software checks vital system files when the system is booted up, monitors the system con-
tinuously for viruslike activity, scans disks, scans memory when a program is run, checks
programs when they are downloaded, and scans email attachments before they are
opened. Two of the most widely used antivirus software products are Norton AntiVirus
from Symantec and Personal Firewall from McAfee.
The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) is a partnership
between the Department of Homeland Security and the public and private sectors—
established in 2003 to protect the nation’s Internet infrastructure against cyberattacks.
US-CERT serves as a clearinghouse for information on new viruses, worms, and other
computer security topics (over 500 new viruses and worms are developed each month36).
According to US-CERT, most of the virus and worm attacks that the team analyzes use
already known malware programs. Thus, it is crucial that antivirus software be continually
updated with the latest virus signatures. In most corporations, the network administrator
is responsible for monitoring network security Web sites frequently and downloading
updated antivirus software as needed. Many antivirus vendors recommend—and provide
for—automatic and frequent updates. Unfortunately, antivirus software is not able to
identify and block all viruses. In fact, in recent testing of 13 antivirus software packages,
only two such programs (Kaspersky Internet Security 2012 and Alwil Avast Internet Security 2012) blocked more than 80 percent of a sample of known exploits, according to
the independent testing firm NSS Labs.37
Implementing Safeguards Against Attacks by Malicious Insiders
User accounts that remain active after employees leave a company are another potential
security risk. To reduce the threat of attack by malicious insiders, IT staff must promptly
delete the computer accounts, login IDs, and passwords of departing employees and
contractors.
Organizations also need to define employee roles carefully and separate key responsi-
bilities properly, so that a single person is not responsible for accomplishing a task that
has high security implications. For example, it would not make sense to allow an employee
to initiate as well as approve purchase orders. That would allow an employee to input large
invoices on behalf of a“friendly vendor,” approve the invoices for payment, and then
disappear from the company to split the money with the vendor. In addition to separating
duties, many organizations frequently rotate people in sensitive positions to prevent
potential insider crimes.
Another important safeguard is to create roles and user accounts so that users have
the authority to perform their responsibilities and nothing more. For example, members of
the Finance Department should have different authorizations from members of the Human
Resources Department. An accountant should not be able to review the pay and atten-
dance records of an employee, and a member of Human Resources should not know how
much was spent to modernize a piece of equipment. Even within one department, not all
members should be given the same capabilities. Within the Finance Department, for
example, some users may be able to approve invoices for payment, but others may only be
able to enter them. An effective system administrator will identify the similarities among
users and create profiles associated with these groups.
Defending Against Cyberterrorism
In the face of increasing risks of cyberterrorism, organizations need to be aware of the
resources available to help them combat this serious threat. The Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) leads the federal government’s efforts in“securing civilian government
computer systems, and works with industry and state, local, tribal, and territorial govern-
ments to secure critical infrastructure and information systems.”38 According to the
department’s Web site, the DHS works to“analyze and reduce cyberthreats and vulner-
abilities; distribute threat warnings; and coordinate the response to cyberincidents to
ensure that our computers, networks, and cybersystems remain safe.”39
The Protected Critical Infrastructure Information Program encourages private indus-
try to share confidential information about the nation’s critical infrastructure with the
DHS under the assurance that the information will be protected from public disclosure.
This allows private industry and DHS to work jointly to identify threats and vulnerabilities
and to develop countermeasures and defensive strategies.40
Critical infrastructures include telecommunications, energy, banking and finance,
water, government operations, and emergency services. Specific targets might include
telephone-switching systems, an electric power grid that serves major portions of a geo-
graphic region, or an air traffic control center that ensures airplanes can take off and land
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
safely. Successful cyberattacks on such targets could cause widespread and massive dis-
ruptions to society. Some computer security experts believe that cyberterrorism attacks
could be used to create further problems following a major act of terrorism by reducing
the ability of fire and emergency teams to respond.
Addressing the Most Critical Internet Security Threats
The overwhelming majority of successful computer attacks takes advantage of well-known
vulnerabilities. Computer attackers know that many organizations are slow to fix problems,
which makes scanning the Internet for vulnerable systems an effective attack strategy.
The rampant and destructive spread of worms, such as Blaster, Slammer, and Code Red,
was made possible by the exploitation of known but unpatched vulnerabilities. US-CERT
regularly updates a summary of the most frequent, high-impact vulnerabilities being
reported to them. You can read this summary at www.us-cert.gov/current. The
actions required to address these issues include installing a known patch to the software
and keeping applications and operating systems up to date. Those responsible for com-
puter security must make it a priority to prevent attacks using these vulnerabilities.
Conducting Periodic IT Security Audits
Another important prevention tool is a security audit that evaluates whether an organiza-
tion has a well-considered security policy in place and if it is being followed. For example,
if a policy says that all users must change their passwords every 30 days, the audit must
check how well that policy is being implemented. The audit should also review who has
access to particular systems and data and what level of authority each user has. It is not
unusual for an audit to reveal that too many people have access to critical data and that
many people have capabilities beyond those needed to perform their jobs. One result of a
good audit is a list of items that need to be addressed in order to ensure that the security
policy is being met.
A thorough security audit should also test system safeguards to ensure that they are
operating as intended. Such tests might include trying the default system passwords that
are active when software is first received from the vendor. The goal of such a test is to
ensure that all such known passwords have been changed.
Some organizations will also perform a penetration test of their defenses. This entails
assigning individuals to try to break through the measures and identify vulnerabilities that
still need to be addressed. The individuals used for this test are knowledgeable and are
likely to take unique approaches in testing the security measures.
The Information Protection Assessment kit is an assessment tool available from
the Computer Security Institute, an organization for information security professionals.
The kit can be accessed at http://gocsi.com/ipak and is formatted as a Microsoft Excel®
spreadsheet that covers 15 categories of security issues (e.g., physical security, business
process controls, network security controls). Each category has approximately 20 state-
ments used to rate the effectiveness of security for that category. Organizations can
complete the survey to get a clear measure of t • A detailed discussion of vulnerabilities that were exploited
• A determination of whether or not the host was compromised as a result of
the attack
• The nature of the data stored on the computer (customer, employee, etc.)
• Whether the data is considered personal, private, or confidential
• The number of hours the system was down
• The overall impact on the business
• An estimate of total monetary damage from the incident
• A detailed chronology of all events associated with the incident
Creating a detailed chronology of all events will also document the incident for later
prosecution. To this end, it is critical to develop an estimate of the monetary damage.
Potential costs include loss of revenue, loss in productivity, and the salaries of people work-
ing to address the incident, along with the cost to replace data, software, and hardware.
Another important issue is the amount of effort that should be put into capturing the
perpetrator. If a Web site was simply defaced, it is easy to fix or restore the site’s HTML
(Hypertext Markup Language—the code that describes to your browser how a Web page
should look). However, what if the intruders inflicted more serious damage, such as eras-
ing proprietary program source code or the contents of key corporate databases? What if
they stole company trade secrets? Expert crackers can conceal their identity, and tracking
them down can take a long time as well as a tremendous amount of corporate resources.
The potential for negative publicity must also be considered. Discussing security attacks
through public trials and the associated publicity has not only enormous potential costs in
public relations but real monetary costs as well. For example, a bank or a brokerage firm
might lose customers who learn of an attack and think their money or records aren’t secure.
Even if a company decides that the negative publicity risk is worth it and goes after the
perpetrator, documents containing proprietary information that must be provided to the
court could cause even greater security threats in the future. On the other hand, an organi-
zation must decide if it has an ethical or a legal duty to inform customers or clients of a
cyberattack that may have put their personal data or financial resources at risk.
Symantec, a leading provider of security software, was attacked in 2006 and the
source code for several of its products was stolen. The firm did not report the embarrassing
incident until six years later. The delay in reporting the breach raised customer concern
and put the company on the defensive.43
Computer Forensics
Computer forensics is a discipline that combines elements of law and computer science to
identify, collect, examine, and preserve data from computer systems, networks, and stor-
age devices in a manner that preserves the integrity of the data gathered so that it is
admissible as evidence in a court of law. A computer forensics investigation may be
opened in response to a criminal investigation or civil litigation. It may also be launched
for a variety of other reasons, for example, to retrace steps taken when data has been lost,
to assess damage following a computer incident, to investigate the unauthorized disclosure
of personal or corporate confidential data, or to confirm or evaluate the impact of industrial
espionage.
Chapter 3
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
Proper handling of a computer forensics investigation is the key to fighting computer
crime successfully in a court of law. In addition, extensive training and certification
increases the stature of a computer forensics investigator in a court of law. There are
numerous certifications related to computer forensics, including the CCE (Certified
Computer Examiner), CISSP (Certified Information Systems Security Professional),
CSFA (CyberSecurity Forensic Analyst), and GCFA (Global Information Assurance
Certification Certified Forensics Analyst). The EnCE Certified Examiner program certifies
professionals who have mastered computer investigation methods as well as the use of
Guidance Software’s EnCase computer forensics software. Numerous universities (both
online and traditional) offer degrees specializing in computer forensics. Such degree
programs should include training in accounting, particularly auditing, as this is very useful
in the investigation of cases involving fraud.
A computer forensics investigator must be knowledgeable about the various laws that
apply to the gathering of criminal evidence; see Table 3-10 for a partial list.
113
Law Subject area
Fourth Amendment Protects against unreasonable search and seizure
Fifth Amendment Provides protection from self-incrimination
Wiretap Act (18 U.S.C. 2510-2522) Regulates the collection of the content of wire and
electronic communications
Pen Registers and Trap and Trace Devices
Statute (18 U.S.C. 3121-27)
Provides restrictions on the use of pen registers and
trap and trace devices (a pen register is a device
that records all numbers dialed from a particular
phone; a trap and trace device shows the phone
numbers that have made calls to a specific phone)
Stored Wire and Electronic Communications
Act (18 U.S.C 2701-120)
Addresses the disclosure of stored wired and
electronic communications and transaction records
by Internet service providers
TABLE 3-10 Partial list of constitutional amendments and statutes governing the collection of
evidence
Source Line: Course Technology/Cengage Learning.
Violation of any one of these laws could result in a case being thrown out of court. It
could even result in the investigator being charged with a federal felony, punishable by a
fine and/or imprisonment.
Table 3-11 provides a manager’s checklist for evaluating an organization’s readiness
for a security incident. The preferred answer to each question is yes.